PART 1 — The Tragedy of Birlstone

Chapter 1 — The Warning

“I am inclined to think—” said I.

“I should do so,” Sherlock Holmes remarked impatiently.

I believe that I am one of the most long-suffering of mortals; but I'lladmit that I was annoyed at the sardonic interruption. “Really, Holmes,”said I severely, “you are a little trying at times.”

He was too much absorbed with his own thoughts to give any immediateanswer to my remonstrance. He leaned upon his hand, with his untastedbreakfast before him, and he stared at the slip of paper which he had justdrawn from its envelope. Then he took the envelope itself, held it up tothe light, and very carefully studied both the exterior and the flap.

“It is Porlock's writing,” said he thoughtfully. “I can hardly doubt thatit is Porlock's writing, though I have seen it only twice before. TheGreek e with the peculiar top flourish is distinctive. But if it isPorlock, then it must be something of the very first importance.”

He was speaking to himself rather than to me; but my vexation disappearedin the interest which the words awakened.

“Who then is Porlock?” I asked.

“Porlock, Watson, is a nom-de-plume, a mere identification mark; butbehind it lies a shifty and evasive personality. In a former letter hefrankly informed me that the name was not his own, and defied me ever totrace him among the teeming millions of this great city. Porlock isimportant, not for himself, but for the great man with whom he is intouch. Picture to yourself the pilot fish with the shark, the jackal withthe lion—anything that is insignificant in companionship with whatis formidable: not only formidable, Watson, but sinister—in thehighest degree sinister. That is where he comes within my purview. Youhave heard me speak of Professor Moriarty?”

“The famous scientific criminal, as famous among crooks as—”

“My blushes, Watson!” Holmes murmured in a deprecating voice.

“I was about to say, as he is unknown to the public.”

“A touch! A distinct touch!” cried Holmes. “You are developing a certainunexpected vein of pawky humour, Watson, against which I must learn toguard myself. But in calling Moriarty a criminal you are uttering libel inthe eyes of the law—and there lie the glory and the wonder of it!The greatest schemer of all time, the organizer of every deviltry, thecontrolling brain of the underworld, a brain which might have made ormarred the destiny of nations—that's the man! But so aloof is hefrom general suspicion, so immune from criticism, so admirable in hismanagement and self-effacement, that for those very words that you haveuttered he could hale you to a court and emerge with your year's pensionas a solatium for his wounded character. Is he not the celebrated authorof The Dynamics of an Asteroid, a book which ascends to such rarefiedheights of pure mathematics that it is said that there was no man in thescientific press capable of criticizing it? Is this a man to traduce?Foul-mouthed doctor and slandered professor—such would be yourrespective roles! That's genius, Watson. But if I am spared by lesser men,our day will surely come.”

“May I be there to see!” I exclaimed devoutly. “But you were speaking ofthis man Porlock.”

“Ah, yes—the so-called Porlock is a link in the chain some littleway from its great attachment. Porlock is not quite a sound link—betweenourselves. He is the only flaw in that chain so far as I have been able totest it.”

“But no chain is stronger than its weakest link.”

“Exactly, my dear Watson! Hence the extreme importance of Porlock. Led onby some rudimentary aspirations towards right, and encouraged by thejudicious stimulation of an occasional ten-pound note sent to him bydevious methods, he has once or twice given me advance information whichhas been of value—that highest value which anticipates and preventsrather than avenges crime. I cannot doubt that, if we had the cipher, weshould find that this communication is of the nature that I indicate.”

Again Holmes flattened out the paper upon his unused plate. I rose and,leaning over him, stared down at the curious inscription, which ran asfollows:

534 C2 13 127 36 31 4 17 21 41 DOUGLAS 109 293 5 37 BIRLSTONE 26 BIRLSTONE9 47 171

“What do you make of it, Holmes?”

“It is obviously an attempt to convey secret information.”

“But what is the use of a cipher message without the cipher?”

“In this instance, none at all.”

“Why do you say 'in this instance'?”

“Because there are many ciphers which I would read as easily as I do theapocrypha of the agony column: such crude devices amuse the intelligencewithout fatiguing it. But this is different. It is clearly a reference tothe words in a page of some book. Until I am told which page and whichbook I am powerless.”

“But why 'Douglas' and 'Birlstone'?”

“Clearly because those are words which were not contained in the page inquestion.”

“Then why has he not indicated the book?”

“Your native shrewdness, my dear Watson, that innate cunning which is thedelight of your friends, would surely prevent you from inclosing cipherand message in the same envelope. Should it miscarry, you are undone. Asit is, both have to go wrong before any harm comes from it. Our secondpost is now overdue, and I shall be surprised if it does not bring useither a further letter of explanation, or, as is more probable, the veryvolume to which these figures refer.”

Holmes's calculation was fulfilled within a very few minutes by theappearance of Billy, the page, with the very letter which we wereexpecting.

“The same writing,” remarked Holmes, as he opened the envelope, “andactually signed,” he added in an exultant voice as he unfolded theepistle. “Come, we are getting on, Watson.” His brow clouded, however, ashe glanced over the contents.

“Dear me, this is very disappointing! I fear, Watson, that all ourexpectations come to nothing. I trust that the man Porlock will come to noharm.

“DEAR MR. HOLMES [he says]:

“I will go no further in this matter. It is too dangerous—hesuspects me. I can see that he suspects me. He came to me quiteunexpectedly after I had actually addressed this envelope with theintention of sending you the key to the cipher. I was able to cover it up.If he had seen it, it would have gone hard with me. But I read suspicionin his eyes. Please burn the cipher message, which can now be of no use toyou.

“FRED PORLOCK.”

Holmes sat for some little time twisting this letter between his fingers,and frowning, as he stared into the fire.

“After all,” he said at last, “there may be nothing in it. It may be onlyhis guilty conscience. Knowing himself to be a traitor, he may have readthe accusation in the other's eyes.”

“The other being, I presume, Professor Moriarty.”

“No less! When any of that party talk about 'He' you know whom they mean.There is one predominant 'He' for all of them.”

“But what can he do?”

“Hum! That's a large question. When you have one of the first brains ofEurope up against you, and all the powers of darkness at his back, thereare infinite possibilities. Anyhow, Friend Porlock is evidently scared outof his senses—kindly compare the writing in the note to that uponits envelope; which was done, he tells us, before this ill-omened visit.The one is clear and firm. The other hardly legible.”

“Why did he write at all? Why did he not simply drop it?”

“Because he feared I would make some inquiry after him in that case, andpossibly bring trouble on him.”

“No doubt,” said I. “Of course.” I had picked up the original ciphermessage and was bending my brows over it. “It's pretty maddening to thinkthat an important secret may lie here on this slip of paper, and that itis beyond human power to penetrate it.”

Sherlock Holmes had pushed away his untasted breakfast and lit theunsavoury pipe which was the companion of his deepest meditations. “Iwonder!” said he, leaning back and staring at the ceiling. “Perhaps thereare points which have escaped your Machiavellian intellect. Let usconsider the problem in the light of pure reason. This man's reference isto a book. That is our point of departure.”

“A somewhat vague one.”

“Let us see then if we can narrow it down. As I focus my mind upon it, itseems rather less impenetrable. What indications have we as to this book?”

“None.”

“Well, well, it is surely not quite so bad as that. The cipher messagebegins with a large 534, does it not? We may take it as a workinghypothesis that 534 is the particular page to which the cipher refers. Soour book has already become a LARGE book, which is surely somethinggained. What other indications have we as to the nature of this largebook? The next sign is C2. What do you make of that, Watson?”

“Chapter the second, no doubt.”

“Hardly that, Watson. You will, I am sure, agree with me that if the pagebe given, the number of the chapter is immaterial. Also that if page 534finds us only in the second chapter, the length of the first one must havebeen really intolerable.”

“Column!” I cried.

“Brilliant, Watson. You are scintillating this morning. If it is notcolumn, then I am very much deceived. So now, you see, we begin tovisualize a large book printed in double columns which are each of aconsiderable length, since one of the words is numbered in the document asthe two hundred and ninety-third. Have we reached the limits of whatreason can supply?”

“I fear that we have.”

“Surely you do yourself an injustice. One more coruscation, my dear Watson—yetanother brain-wave! Had the volume been an unusual one, he would have sentit to me. Instead of that, he had intended, before his plans were nipped,to send me the clue in this envelope. He says so in his note. This wouldseem to indicate that the book is one which he thought I would have nodifficulty in finding for myself. He had it—and he imagined that Iwould have it, too. In short, Watson, it is a very common book.”

“What you say certainly sounds plausible.”

“So we have contracted our field of search to a large book, printed indouble columns and in common use.”

“The Bible!” I cried triumphantly.

“Good, Watson, good! But not, if I may say so, quite good enough! Even ifI accepted the compliment for myself I could hardly name any volume whichwould be less likely to lie at the elbow of one of Moriarty's associates.Besides, the editions of Holy Writ are so numerous that he could hardlysuppose that two copies would have the same pagination. This is clearly abook which is standardized. He knows for certain that his page 534 willexactly agree with my page 534.”

“But very few books would correspond with that.”

“Exactly. Therein lies our salvation. Our search is narrowed down tostandardized books which anyone may be supposed to possess.”

“Bradshaw!”

“There are difficulties, Watson. The vocabulary of Bradshaw is nervous andterse, but limited. The selection of words would hardly lend itself to thesending of general messages. We will eliminate Bradshaw. The dictionaryis, I fear, inadmissible for the same reason. What then is left?”

“An almanac!”

“Excellent, Watson! I am very much mistaken if you have not touched thespot. An almanac! Let us consider the claims of Whitaker's Almanac. It isin common use. It has the requisite number of pages. It is in doublecolumn. Though reserved in its earlier vocabulary, it becomes, if Iremember right, quite garrulous towards the end.” He picked the volumefrom his desk. “Here is page 534, column two, a substantial block of printdealing, I perceive, with the trade and resources of British India. Jotdown the words, Watson! Number thirteen is 'Mahratta.' Not, I fear, a veryauspicious beginning. Number one hundred and twenty-seven is 'Government';which at least makes sense, though somewhat irrelevant to ourselves andProfessor Moriarty. Now let us try again. What does the Mahrattagovernment do? Alas! the next word is 'pig's-bristles.' We are undone, mygood Watson! It is finished!”

He had spoken in jesting vein, but the twitching of his bushy eyebrowsbespoke his disappointment and irritation. I sat helpless and unhappy,staring into the fire. A long silence was broken by a sudden exclamationfrom Holmes, who dashed at a cupboard, from which he emerged with a secondyellow-covered volume in his hand.

“We pay the price, Watson, for being too up-to-date!” he cried. “We arebefore our time, and suffer the usual penalties. Being the seventh ofJanuary, we have very properly laid in the new almanac. It is more thanlikely that Porlock took his message from the old one. No doubt he wouldhave told us so had his letter of explanation been written. Now let us seewhat page 534 has in store for us. Number thirteen is 'There,' which ismuch more promising. Number one hundred and twenty-seven is 'is'—'Thereis' “—Holmes's eyes were gleaming with excitement, and his thin,nervous fingers twitched as he counted the words—“'danger.' Ha! Ha!Capital! Put that down, Watson. 'There is danger—may—come—verysoon—one.' Then we have the name 'Douglas'—'rich—country—now—atBirlstone—House—Birlstone—confidence—is—pressing.'There, Watson! What do you think of pure reason and its fruit? If thegreen-grocer had such a thing as a laurel wreath, I should send Billyround for it.”

I was staring at the strange message which I had scrawled, as hedeciphered it, upon a sheet of foolscap on my knee.

“What a queer, scrambling way of expressing his meaning!” said I.

“On the contrary, he has done quite remarkably well,” said Holmes. “Whenyou search a single column for words with which to express your meaning,you can hardly expect to get everything you want. You are bound to leavesomething to the intelligence of your correspondent. The purport isperfectly clear. Some deviltry is intended against one Douglas, whoever hemay be, residing as stated, a rich country gentleman. He is sure—'confidence'was as near as he could get to 'confident'—that it is pressing.There is our result—and a very workmanlike little bit of analysis itwas!”

Holmes had the impersonal joy of the true artist in his better work, evenas he mourned darkly when it fell below the high level to which heaspired. He was still chuckling over his success when Billy swung open thedoor and Inspector MacDonald of Scotland Yard was ushered into the room.

Those were the early days at the end of the '80's, when Alec MacDonald wasfar from having attained the national fame which he has now achieved. Hewas a young but trusted member of the detective force, who haddistinguished himself in several cases which had been intrusted to him.His tall, bony figure gave promise of exceptional physical strength, whilehis great cranium and deep-set, lustrous eyes spoke no less clearly of thekeen intelligence which twinkled out from behind his bushy eyebrows. Hewas a silent, precise man with a dour nature and a hard Aberdonian accent.

Twice already in his career had Holmes helped him to attain success, hisown sole reward being the intellectual joy of the problem. For this reasonthe affection and respect of the Scotchman for his amateur colleague wereprofound, and he showed them by the frankness with which he consultedHolmes in every difficulty. Mediocrity knows nothing higher than itself;but talent instantly recognizes genius, and MacDonald had talent enoughfor his profession to enable him to perceive that there was no humiliationin seeking the assistance of one who already stood alone in Europe, bothin his gifts and in his experience. Holmes was not prone to friendship,but he was tolerant of the big Scotchman, and smiled at the sight of him.

“You are an early bird, Mr. Mac,” said he. “I wish you luck with yourworm. I fear this means that there is some mischief afoot.”

“If you said 'hope' instead of 'fear,' it would be nearer the truth, I'mthinking, Mr. Holmes,” the inspector answered, with a knowing grin. “Well,maybe a wee nip would keep out the raw morning chill. No, I won't smoke, Ithank you. I'll have to be pushing on my way; for the early hours of acase are the precious ones, as no man knows better than your own self. But—but—”

The inspector had stopped suddenly, and was staring with a look ofabsolute amazement at a paper upon the table. It was the sheet upon whichI had scrawled the enigmatic message.

“Douglas!” he stammered. “Birlstone! What's this, Mr. Holmes? Man, it'switchcraft! Where in the name of all that is wonderful did you get thosenames?”

“It is a cipher that Dr. Watson and I have had occasion to solve. But why—what'samiss with the names?”

The inspector looked from one to the other of us in dazed astonishment.“Just this,” said he, “that Mr. Douglas of Birlstone Manor House washorribly murdered last night!”

Chapter 2 — Sherlock Holmes Discourses

It was one of those dramatic moments for which my friend existed. It wouldbe an overstatement to say that he was shocked or even excited by theamazing announcement. Without having a tinge of cruelty in his singularcomposition, he was undoubtedly callous from long overstimulation. Yet, ifhis emotions were dulled, his intellectual perceptions were exceedinglyactive. There was no trace then of the horror which I had myself felt atthis curt declaration; but his face showed rather the quiet and interestedcomposure of the chemist who sees the crystals falling into position fromhis oversaturated solution.

“Remarkable!” said he. “Remarkable!”

“You don't seem surprised.”

“Interested, Mr. Mac, but hardly surprised. Why should I be surprised? Ireceive an anonymous communication from a quarter which I know to beimportant, warning me that danger threatens a certain person. Within anhour I learn that this danger has actually materialized and that theperson is dead. I am interested; but, as you observe, I am not surprised.”

In a few short sentences he explained to the inspector the facts about theletter and the cipher. MacDonald sat with his chin on his hands and hisgreat sandy eyebrows bunched into a yellow tangle.

“I was going down to Birlstone this morning,” said he. “I had come to askyou if you cared to come with me—you and your friend here. But fromwhat you say we might perhaps be doing better work in London.”

“I rather think not,” said Holmes.

“Hang it all, Mr. Holmes!” cried the inspector. “The papers will be fullof the Birlstone mystery in a day or two; but where's the mystery if thereis a man in London who prophesied the crime before ever it occurred? Wehave only to lay our hands on that man, and the rest will follow.”

“No doubt, Mr. Mac. But how do you propose to lay your hands on theso-called Porlock?”

MacDonald turned over the letter which Holmes had handed him. “Posted inCamberwell—that doesn't help us much. Name, you say, is assumed. Notmuch to go on, certainly. Didn't you say that you have sent him money?”

“Twice.”

“And how?”

“In notes to Camberwell post office.”

“Did you ever trouble to see who called for them?”

“No.”

The inspector looked surprised and a little shocked. “Why not?”

“Because I always keep faith. I had promised when he first wrote that Iwould not try to trace him.”

“You think there is someone behind him?”

“I know there is.”

“This professor that I've heard you mention?”

“Exactly!”

Inspector MacDonald smiled, and his eyelid quivered as he glanced towardsme. “I won't conceal from you, Mr. Holmes, that we think in the C.I.D.that you have a wee bit of a bee in your bonnet over this professor. Imade some inquiries myself about the matter. He seems to be a veryrespectable, learned, and talented sort of man.”

“I'm glad you've got so far as to recognize the talent.”

“Man, you can't but recognize it! After I heard your view I made it mybusiness to see him. I had a chat with him on eclipses. How the talk gotthat way I canna think; but he had out a reflector lantern and a globe,and made it all clear in a minute. He lent me a book; but I don't mindsaying that it was a bit above my head, though I had a good Aberdeenupbringing. He'd have made a grand meenister with his thin face and grayhair and solemn-like way of talking. When he put his hand on my shoulderas we were parting, it was like a father's blessing before you go out intothe cold, cruel world.”

Holmes chuckled and rubbed his hands. “Great!” he said. “Great! Tell me,Friend MacDonald, this pleasing and touching interview was, I suppose, inthe professor's study?”

“That's so.”

“A fine room, is it not?”

“Very fine—very handsome indeed, Mr. Holmes.”

“You sat in front of his writing desk?”

“Just so.”

“Sun in your eyes and his face in the shadow?”

“Well, it was evening; but I mind that the lamp was turned on my face.”

“It would be. Did you happen to observe a picture over the professor'shead?”

“I don't miss much, Mr. Holmes. Maybe I learned that from you. Yes, I sawthe picture—a young woman with her head on her hands, peeping at yousideways.”

“That painting was by Jean Baptiste Greuze.”

The inspector endeavoured to look interested.

“Jean Baptiste Greuze,” Holmes continued, joining his finger tips andleaning well back in his chair, “was a French artist who flourishedbetween the years 1750 and 1800. I allude, of course to his workingcareer. Modern criticism has more than indorsed the high opinion formed ofhim by his contemporaries.”

The inspector's eyes grew abstracted. “Hadn't we better—” he said.

“We are doing so,” Holmes interrupted. “All that I am saying has a verydirect and vital bearing upon what you have called the Birlstone Mystery.In fact, it may in a sense be called the very centre of it.”

MacDonald smiled feebly, and looked appealingly to me. “Your thoughts movea bit too quick for me, Mr. Holmes. You leave out a link or two, and Ican't get over the gap. What in the whole wide world can be the connectionbetween this dead painting man and the affair at Birlstone?”

“All knowledge comes useful to the detective,” remarked Holmes. “Even thetrivial fact that in the year 1865 a picture by Greuze entitled La JeuneFille a l'Agneau fetched one million two hundred thousand francs—morethan forty thousand pounds—at the Portalis sale may start a train ofreflection in your mind.”

It was clear that it did. The inspector looked honestly interested.

“I may remind you,” Holmes continued, “that the professor's salary can beascertained in several trustworthy books of reference. It is seven hundreda year.”

“Then how could he buy—”

“Quite so! How could he?”

“Ay, that's remarkable,” said the inspector thoughtfully. “Talk away, Mr.Holmes. I'm just loving it. It's fine!”

Holmes smiled. He was always warmed by genuine admiration—thecharacteristic of the real artist. “What about Birlstone?” he asked.

“We've time yet,” said the inspector, glancing at his watch. “I've a cabat the door, and it won't take us twenty minutes to Victoria. But aboutthis picture: I thought you told me once, Mr. Holmes, that you had nevermet Professor Moriarty.”

“No, I never have.”

“Then how do you know about his rooms?”

“Ah, that's another matter. I have been three times in his rooms, twicewaiting for him under different pretexts and leaving before he came. Once—well,I can hardly tell about the once to an official detective. It was on thelast occasion that I took the liberty of running over his papers—withthe most unexpected results.”

“You found something compromising?”

“Absolutely nothing. That was what amazed me. However, you have now seenthe point of the picture. It shows him to be a very wealthy man. How didhe acquire wealth? He is unmarried. His younger brother is a stationmaster in the west of England. His chair is worth seven hundred a year.And he owns a Greuze.”

“Well?”

“Surely the inference is plain.”

“You mean that he has a great income and that he must earn it in anillegal fashion?”

“Exactly. Of course I have other reasons for thinking so—dozens ofexiguous threads which lead vaguely up towards the centre of the web wherethe poisonous, motionless creature is lurking. I only mention the Greuzebecause it brings the matter within the range of your own observation.”

“Well, Mr. Holmes, I admit that what you say is interesting: it's morethan interesting—it's just wonderful. But let us have it a littleclearer if you can. Is it forgery, coining, burglary—where does themoney come from?”

“Have you ever read of Jonathan Wild?”

“Well, the name has a familiar sound. Someone in a novel, was he not? Idon't take much stock of detectives in novels—chaps that do thingsand never let you see how they do them. That's just inspiration: notbusiness.”

“Jonathan Wild wasn't a detective, and he wasn't in a novel. He was amaster criminal, and he lived last century—1750 or thereabouts.”

“Then he's no use to me. I'm a practical man.”

“Mr. Mac, the most practical thing that you ever did in your life would beto shut yourself up for three months and read twelve hours a day at theannals of crime. Everything comes in circles—even ProfessorMoriarty. Jonathan Wild was the hidden force of the London criminals, towhom he sold his brains and his organization on a fifteen per cent.commission. The old wheel turns, and the same spoke comes up. It's allbeen done before, and will be again. I'll tell you one or two things aboutMoriarty which may interest you.”

“You'll interest me, right enough.”

“I happen to know who is the first link in his chain—a chain withthis Napoleon-gone-wrong at one end, and a hundred broken fighting men,pickpockets, blackmailers, and card sharpers at the other, with every sortof crime in between. His chief of staff is Colonel Sebastian Moran, asaloof and guarded and inaccessible to the law as himself. What do youthink he pays him?”

“I'd like to hear.”

“Six thousand a year. That's paying for brains, you see—the Americanbusiness principle. I learned that detail quite by chance. It's more thanthe Prime Minister gets. That gives you an idea of Moriarty's gains and ofthe scale on which he works. Another point: I made it my business to huntdown some of Moriarty's checks lately—just common innocent checksthat he pays his household bills with. They were drawn on six differentbanks. Does that make any impression on your mind?”

“Queer, certainly! But what do you gather from it?”

“That he wanted no gossip about his wealth. No single man should know whathe had. I have no doubt that he has twenty banking accounts; the bulk ofhis fortune abroad in the Deutsche Bank or the Credit Lyonnais as likelyas not. Sometime when you have a year or two to spare I commend to you thestudy of Professor Moriarty.”

Inspector MacDonald had grown steadily more impressed as the conversationproceeded. He had lost himself in his interest. Now his practical Scotchintelligence brought him back with a snap to the matter in hand.

“He can keep, anyhow,” said he. “You've got us side-tracked with yourinteresting anecdotes, Mr. Holmes. What really counts is your remark thatthere is some connection between the professor and the crime. That you getfrom the warning received through the man Porlock. Can we for our presentpractical needs get any further than that?”

“We may form some conception as to the motives of the crime. It is, as Igather from your original remarks, an inexplicable, or at least anunexplained, murder. Now, presuming that the source of the crime is as wesuspect it to be, there might be two different motives. In the firstplace, I may tell you that Moriarty rules with a rod of iron over hispeople. His discipline is tremendous. There is only one punishment in hiscode. It is death. Now we might suppose that this murdered man—thisDouglas whose approaching fate was known by one of the arch-criminal'ssubordinates—had in some way betrayed the chief. His punishmentfollowed, and would be known to all—if only to put the fear of deathinto them.”

“Well, that is one suggestion, Mr. Holmes.”

“The other is that it has been engineered by Moriarty in the ordinarycourse of business. Was there any robbery?”

“I have not heard.”

“If so, it would, of course, be against the first hypothesis and in favourof the second. Moriarty may have been engaged to engineer it on a promiseof part spoils, or he may have been paid so much down to manage it. Eitheris possible. But whichever it may be, or if it is some third combination,it is down at Birlstone that we must seek the solution. I know our man toowell to suppose that he has left anything up here which may lead us tohim.”

“Then to Birlstone we must go!” cried MacDonald, jumping from his chair.“My word! it's later than I thought. I can give you, gentlemen, fiveminutes for preparation, and that is all.”

“And ample for us both,” said Holmes, as he sprang up and hastened tochange from his dressing gown to his coat. “While we are on our way, Mr.Mac, I will ask you to be good enough to tell me all about it.”

“All about it” proved to be disappointingly little, and yet there wasenough to assure us that the case before us might well be worthy of theexpert's closest attention. He brightened and rubbed his thin handstogether as he listened to the meagre but remarkable details. A longseries of sterile weeks lay behind us, and here at last there was afitting object for those remarkable powers which, like all special gifts,become irksome to their owner when they are not in use. That razor brainblunted and rusted with inaction.

Sherlock Holmes's eyes glistened, his pale cheeks took a warmer hue, andhis whole eager face shone with an inward light when the call for workreached him. Leaning forward in the cab, he listened intently toMacDonald's short sketch of the problem which awaited us in Sussex. Theinspector was himself dependent, as he explained to us, upon a scribbledaccount forwarded to him by the milk train in the early hours of themorning. White Mason, the local officer, was a personal friend, and henceMacDonald had been notified much more promptly than is usual at ScotlandYard when provincials need their assistance. It is a very cold scent uponwhich the Metropolitan expert is generally asked to run.

“DEAR INSPECTOR MACDONALD [said the letter which he read to us]:

“Official requisition for your services is in separate envelope. This isfor your private eye. Wire me what train in the morning you can get forBirlstone, and I will meet it—or have it met if I am too occupied.This case is a snorter. Don't waste a moment in getting started. If youcan bring Mr. Holmes, please do so; for he will find something after hisown heart. We would think the whole had been fixed up for theatricaleffect if there wasn't a dead man in the middle of it. My word! it IS asnorter.”

“Your friend seems to be no fool,” remarked Holmes.

“No, sir, White Mason is a very live man, if I am any judge.”

“Well, have you anything more?”

“Only that he will give us every detail when we meet.”

“Then how did you get at Mr. Douglas and the fact that he had beenhorribly murdered?”

“That was in the inclosed official report. It didn't say 'horrible':that's not a recognized official term. It gave the name John Douglas. Itmentioned that his injuries had been in the head, from the discharge of ashotgun. It also mentioned the hour of the alarm, which was close on tomidnight last night. It added that the case was undoubtedly one of murder,but that no arrest had been made, and that the case was one whichpresented some very perplexing and extraordinary features. That'sabsolutely all we have at present, Mr. Holmes.”

“Then, with your permission, we will leave it at that, Mr. Mac. Thetemptation to form premature theories upon insufficient data is the baneof our profession. I can see only two things for certain at present—agreat brain in London, and a dead man in Sussex. It's the chain betweenthat we are going to trace.”

Chapter 3 — The Tragedy of Birlstone

Now for a moment I will ask leave to remove my own insignificantpersonality and to describe events which occurred before we arrived uponthe scene by the light of knowledge which came to us afterwards. Only inthis way can I make the reader appreciate the people concerned and thestrange setting in which their fate was cast.

The village of Birlstone is a small and very ancient cluster ofhalf-timbered cottages on the northern border of the county of Sussex. Forcenturies it had remained unchanged; but within the last few years itspicturesque appearance and situation have attracted a number of well-to-doresidents, whose villas peep out from the woods around. These woods arelocally supposed to be the extreme fringe of the great Weald forest, whichthins away until it reaches the northern chalk downs. A number of smallshops have come into being to meet the wants of the increased population;so there seems some prospect that Birlstone may soon grow from an ancientvillage into a modern town. It is the centre for a considerable area ofcountry, since Tunbridge Wells, the nearest place of importance, is ten ortwelve miles to the eastward, over the borders of Kent.

About half a mile from the town, standing in an old park famous for itshuge beech trees, is the ancient Manor House of Birlstone. Part of thisvenerable building dates back to the time of the first crusade, when Hugode Capus built a fortalice in the centre of the estate, which had beengranted to him by the Red King. This was destroyed by fire in 1543, andsome of its smoke-blackened corner stones were used when, in Jacobeantimes, a brick country house rose upon the ruins of the feudal castle.

The Manor House, with its many gables and its small diamond-paned windows,was still much as the builder had left it in the early seventeenthcentury. Of the double moats which had guarded its more warlikepredecessor, the outer had been allowed to dry up, and served the humblefunction of a kitchen garden. The inner one was still there, and lay fortyfeet in breadth, though now only a few feet in depth, round the wholehouse. A small stream fed it and continued beyond it, so that the sheet ofwater, though turbid, was never ditchlike or unhealthy. The ground floorwindows were within a foot of the surface of the water.

The only approach to the house was over a drawbridge, the chains andwindlass of which had long been rusted and broken. The latest tenants ofthe Manor House had, however, with characteristic energy, set this right,and the drawbridge was not only capable of being raised, but actually wasraised every evening and lowered every morning. By thus renewing thecustom of the old feudal days the Manor House was converted into an islandduring the night—a fact which had a very direct bearing upon themystery which was soon to engage the attention of all England.

The house had been untenanted for some years and was threatening tomoulder into a picturesque decay when the Douglases took possession of it.This family consisted of only two individuals—John Douglas and hiswife. Douglas was a remarkable man, both in character and in person. Inage he may have been about fifty, with a strong-jawed, rugged face, agrizzling moustache, peculiarly keen gray eyes, and a wiry, vigorousfigure which had lost nothing of the strength and activity of youth. Hewas cheery and genial to all, but somewhat offhand in his manners, givingthe impression that he had seen life in social strata on some far lowerhorizon than the county society of Sussex.

Yet, though looked at with some curiosity and reserve by his morecultivated neighbours, he soon acquired a great popularity among thevillagers, subscribing handsomely to all local objects, and attendingtheir smoking concerts and other functions, where, having a remarkablyrich tenor voice, he was always ready to oblige with an excellent song. Heappeared to have plenty of money, which was said to have been gained inthe California gold fields, and it was clear from his own talk and that ofhis wife that he had spent a part of his life in America.

The good impression which had been produced by his generosity and by hisdemocratic manners was increased by a reputation gained for utterindifference to danger. Though a wretched rider, he turned out at everymeet, and took the most amazing falls in his determination to hold his ownwith the best. When the vicarage caught fire he distinguished himself alsoby the fearlessness with which he reentered the building to save property,after the local fire brigade had given it up as impossible. Thus it cameabout that John Douglas of the Manor House had within five years wonhimself quite a reputation in Birlstone.

His wife, too, was popular with those who had made her acquaintance;though, after the English fashion, the callers upon a stranger who settledin the county without introductions were few and far between. Thismattered the less to her, as she was retiring by disposition, and verymuch absorbed, to all appearance, in her husband and her domestic duties.It was known that she was an English lady who had met Mr. Douglas inLondon, he being at that time a widower. She was a beautiful woman, tall,dark, and slender, some twenty years younger than her husband; a disparitywhich seemed in no wise to mar the contentment of their family life.

It was remarked sometimes, however, by those who knew them best, that theconfidence between the two did not appear to be complete, since the wifewas either very reticent about her husband's past life, or else, as seemedmore likely, was imperfectly informed about it. It had also been noted andcommented upon by a few observant people that there were signs sometimesof some nerve-strain upon the part of Mrs. Douglas, and that she woulddisplay acute uneasiness if her absent husband should ever be particularlylate in his return. On a quiet countryside, where all gossip is welcome,this weakness of the lady of the Manor House did not pass without remark,and it bulked larger upon people's memory when the events arose which gaveit a very special significance.

There was yet another individual whose residence under that roof was, itis true, only an intermittent one, but whose presence at the time of thestrange happenings which will now be narrated brought his name prominentlybefore the public. This was Cecil James Barker, of Hales Lodge, Hampstead.

Cecil Barker's tall, loose-jointed figure was a familiar one in the mainstreet of Birlstone village; for he was a frequent and welcome visitor atthe Manor House. He was the more noticed as being the only friend of thepast unknown life of Mr. Douglas who was ever seen in his new Englishsurroundings. Barker was himself an undoubted Englishman; but by hisremarks it was clear that he had first known Douglas in America and hadthere lived on intimate terms with him. He appeared to be a man ofconsiderable wealth, and was reputed to be a bachelor.

In age he was rather younger than Douglas—forty-five at the most—atall, straight, broad-chested fellow with a clean-shaved, prize-fighterface, thick, strong, black eyebrows, and a pair of masterful black eyeswhich might, even without the aid of his very capable hands, clear a wayfor him through a hostile crowd. He neither rode nor shot, but spent hisdays in wandering round the old village with his pipe in his mouth, or indriving with his host, or in his absence with his hostess, over thebeautiful countryside. “An easy-going, free-handed gentleman,” said Ames,the butler. “But, my word! I had rather not be the man that crossed him!”He was cordial and intimate with Douglas, and he was no less friendly withhis wife—a friendship which more than once seemed to cause someirritation to the husband, so that even the servants were able to perceivehis annoyance. Such was the third person who was one of the family whenthe catastrophe occurred.

As to the other denizens of the old building, it will suffice out of alarge household to mention the prim, respectable, and capable Ames, andMrs. Allen, a buxom and cheerful person, who relieved the lady of some ofher household cares. The other six servants in the house bear no relationto the events of the night of January 6th.

It was at eleven forty-five that the first alarm reached the small localpolice station, in charge of Sergeant Wilson of the Sussex Constabulary.Cecil Barker, much excited, had rushed up to the door and pealed furiouslyupon the bell. A terrible tragedy had occurred at the Manor House, andJohn Douglas had been murdered. That was the breathless burden of hismessage. He had hurried back to the house, followed within a few minutesby the police sergeant, who arrived at the scene of the crime a littleafter twelve o'clock, after taking prompt steps to warn the countyauthorities that something serious was afoot.

On reaching the Manor House, the sergeant had found the drawbridge down,the windows lighted up, and the whole household in a state of wildconfusion and alarm. The white-faced servants were huddling together inthe hall, with the frightened butler wringing his hands in the doorway.Only Cecil Barker seemed to be master of himself and his emotions; he hadopened the door which was nearest to the entrance and he had beckoned tothe sergeant to follow him. At that moment there arrived Dr. Wood, a briskand capable general practitioner from the village. The three men enteredthe fatal room together, while the horror-stricken butler followed attheir heels, closing the door behind him to shut out the terrible scenefrom the maid servants.

The dead man lay on his back, sprawling with outstretched limbs in thecentre of the room. He was clad only in a pink dressing gown, whichcovered his night clothes. There were carpet slippers on his bare feet.The doctor knelt beside him and held down the hand lamp which had stood onthe table. One glance at the victim was enough to show the healer that hispresence could be dispensed with. The man had been horribly injured. Lyingacross his chest was a curious weapon, a shotgun with the barrel sawed offa foot in front of the triggers. It was clear that this had been fired atclose range and that he had received the whole charge in the face, blowinghis head almost to pieces. The triggers had been wired together, so as tomake the simultaneous discharge more destructive.

The country policeman was unnerved and troubled by the tremendousresponsibility which had come so suddenly upon him. “We will touch nothinguntil my superiors arrive,” he said in a hushed voice, staring in horrorat the dreadful head.

“Nothing has been touched up to now,” said Cecil Barker. “I'll answer forthat. You see it all exactly as I found it.”

“When was that?” The sergeant had drawn out his notebook.

“It was just half-past eleven. I had not begun to undress, and I wassitting by the fire in my bedroom when I heard the report. It was not veryloud—it seemed to be muffled. I rushed down—I don't suppose itwas thirty seconds before I was in the room.”

“Was the door open?”

“Yes, it was open. Poor Douglas was lying as you see him. His bedroomcandle was burning on the table. It was I who lit the lamp some minutesafterward.”

“Did you see no one?”

“No. I heard Mrs. Douglas coming down the stair behind me, and I rushedout to prevent her from seeing this dreadful sight. Mrs. Allen, thehousekeeper, came and took her away. Ames had arrived, and we ran backinto the room once more.”

“But surely I have heard that the drawbridge is kept up all night.”

“Yes, it was up until I lowered it.”

“Then how could any murderer have got away? It is out of the question! Mr.Douglas must have shot himself.”

“That was our first idea. But see!” Barker drew aside the curtain, andshowed that the long, diamond-paned window was open to its full extent.“And look at this!” He held the lamp down and illuminated a smudge ofblood like the mark of a boot-sole upon the wooden sill. “Someone hasstood there in getting out.”

“You mean that someone waded across the moat?”

“Exactly!”

“Then if you were in the room within half a minute of the crime, he musthave been in the water at that very moment.”

“I have not a doubt of it. I wish to heaven that I had rushed to thewindow! But the curtain screened it, as you can see, and so it neveroccurred to me. Then I heard the step of Mrs. Douglas, and I could not lether enter the room. It would have been too horrible.”

“Horrible enough!” said the doctor, looking at the shattered head and theterrible marks which surrounded it. “I've never seen such injuries sincethe Birlstone railway smash.”

“But, I say,” remarked the police sergeant, whose slow, bucolic commonsense was still pondering the open window. “It's all very well your sayingthat a man escaped by wading this moat, but what I ask you is, how did heever get into the house at all if the bridge was up?”

“Ah, that's the question,” said Barker.

“At what o'clock was it raised?”

“It was nearly six o'clock,” said Ames, the butler.

“I've heard,” said the sergeant, “that it was usually raised at sunset.That would be nearer half-past four than six at this time of year.”

“Mrs. Douglas had visitors to tea,” said Ames. “I couldn't raise it untilthey went. Then I wound it up myself.”

“Then it comes to this,” said the sergeant: “If anyone came from outside—IFthey did—they must have got in across the bridge before six and beenin hiding ever since, until Mr. Douglas came into the room after eleven.”

“That is so! Mr. Douglas went round the house every night the last thingbefore he turned in to see that the lights were right. That brought him inhere. The man was waiting and shot him. Then he got away through thewindow and left his gun behind him. That's how I read it; for nothing elsewill fit the facts.”

The sergeant picked up a card which lay beside the dead man on the floor.The initials V.V. and under them the number 341 were rudely scrawled inink upon it.

“What's this?” he asked, holding it up.

Barker looked at it with curiosity. “I never noticed it before,” he said.“The murderer must have left it behind him.”

“V.V.—341. I can make no sense of that.”

The sergeant kept turning it over in his big fingers. “What's V.V.?Somebody's initials, maybe. What have you got there, Dr. Wood?”

It was a good-sized hammer which had been lying on the rug in front of thefireplace—a substantial, workmanlike hammer. Cecil Barker pointed toa box of brass-headed nails upon the mantelpiece.

“Mr. Douglas was altering the pictures yesterday,” he said. “I saw himmyself, standing upon that chair and fixing the big picture above it. Thataccounts for the hammer.”

“We'd best put it back on the rug where we found it,” said the sergeant,scratching his puzzled head in his perplexity. “It will want the bestbrains in the force to get to the bottom of this thing. It will be aLondon job before it is finished.” He raised the hand lamp and walkedslowly round the room. “Hullo!” he cried, excitedly, drawing the windowcurtain to one side. “What o'clock were those curtains drawn?”

“When the lamps were lit,” said the butler. “It would be shortly afterfour.”

“Someone had been hiding here, sure enough.” He held down the light, andthe marks of muddy boots were very visible in the corner. “I'm bound tosay this bears out your theory, Mr. Barker. It looks as if the man gotinto the house after four when the curtains were drawn, and before sixwhen the bridge was raised. He slipped into this room, because it was thefirst that he saw. There was no other place where he could hide, so hepopped in behind this curtain. That all seems clear enough. It is likelythat his main idea was to burgle the house; but Mr. Douglas chanced tocome upon him, so he murdered him and escaped.”

“That's how I read it,” said Barker. “But, I say, aren't we wastingprecious time? Couldn't we start out and scout the country before thefellow gets away?”

The sergeant considered for a moment.

“There are no trains before six in the morning; so he can't get away byrail. If he goes by road with his legs all dripping, it's odds thatsomeone will notice him. Anyhow, I can't leave here myself until I amrelieved. But I think none of you should go until we see more clearly howwe all stand.”

The doctor had taken the lamp and was narrowly scrutinizing the body.“What's this mark?” he asked. “Could this have any connection with thecrime?”

The dead man's right arm was thrust out from his dressing gown, andexposed as high as the elbow. About halfway up the forearm was a curiousbrown design, a triangle inside a circle, standing out in vivid reliefupon the lard-coloured skin.

“It's not tattooed,” said the doctor, peering through his glasses. “Inever saw anything like it. The man has been branded at some time as theybrand cattle. What is the meaning of this?”

“I don't profess to know the meaning of it,” said Cecil Barker; “but Ihave seen the mark on Douglas many times this last ten years.”

“And so have I,” said the butler. “Many a time when the master has rolledup his sleeves I have noticed that very mark. I've often wondered what itcould be.”

“Then it has nothing to do with the crime, anyhow,” said the sergeant.“But it's a rum thing all the same. Everything about this case is rum.Well, what is it now?”

The butler had given an exclamation of astonishment and was pointing atthe dead man's outstretched hand.

“They've taken his wedding ring!” he gasped.

“What!”

“Yes, indeed. Master always wore his plain gold wedding ring on the littlefinger of his left hand. That ring with the rough nugget on it was aboveit, and the twisted snake ring on the third finger. There's the nugget andthere's the snake, but the wedding ring is gone.”

“He's right,” said Barker.

“Do you tell me,” said the sergeant, “that the wedding ring was BELOW theother?”

“Always!”

“Then the murderer, or whoever it was, first took off this ring you callthe nugget ring, then the wedding ring, and afterwards put the nugget ringback again.”

“That is so!”

The worthy country policeman shook his head. “Seems to me the sooner weget London on to this case the better,” said he. “White Mason is a smartman. No local job has ever been too much for White Mason. It won't be longnow before he is here to help us. But I expect we'll have to look toLondon before we are through. Anyhow, I'm not ashamed to say that it is adeal too thick for the likes of me.”

Chapter 4 — Darkness

At three in the morning the chief Sussex detective, obeying the urgentcall from Sergeant Wilson of Birlstone, arrived from headquarters in alight dog-cart behind a breathless trotter. By the five-forty train in themorning he had sent his message to Scotland Yard, and he was at theBirlstone station at twelve o'clock to welcome us. White Mason was aquiet, comfortable-looking person in a loose tweed suit, with aclean-shaved, ruddy face, a stoutish body, and powerful bandy legs adornedwith gaiters, looking like a small farmer, a retired gamekeeper, oranything upon earth except a very favourable specimen of the provincialcriminal officer.

“A real downright snorter, Mr. MacDonald!” he kept repeating. “We'll havethe pressmen down like flies when they understand it. I'm hoping we willget our work done before they get poking their noses into it and messingup all the trails. There has been nothing like this that I can remember.There are some bits that will come home to you, Mr. Holmes, or I ammistaken. And you also, Dr. Watson; for the medicos will have a word tosay before we finish. Your room is at the Westville Arms. There's no otherplace; but I hear that it is clean and good. The man will carry your bags.This way, gentlemen, if you please.”

He was a very bustling and genial person, this Sussex detective. In tenminutes we had all found our quarters. In ten more we were seated in theparlour of the inn and being treated to a rapid sketch of those eventswhich have been outlined in the previous chapter. MacDonald made anoccasional note; while Holmes sat absorbed, with the expression ofsurprised and reverent admiration with which the botanist surveys the rareand precious bloom.

“Remarkable!” he said, when the story was unfolded, “most remarkable! Ican hardly recall any case where the features have been more peculiar.”

“I thought you would say so, Mr. Holmes,” said White Mason in greatdelight. “We're well up with the times in Sussex. I've told you now howmatters were, up to the time when I took over from Sergeant Wilson betweenthree and four this morning. My word! I made the old mare go! But I neednot have been in such a hurry, as it turned out; for there was nothingimmediate that I could do. Sergeant Wilson had all the facts. I checkedthem and considered them and maybe added a few of my own.”

“What were they?” asked Holmes eagerly.

“Well, I first had the hammer examined. There was Dr. Wood there to helpme. We found no signs of violence upon it. I was hoping that if Mr.Douglas defended himself with the hammer, he might have left his mark uponthe murderer before he dropped it on the mat. But there was no stain.”

“That, of course, proves nothing at all,” remarked Inspector MacDonald.“There has been many a hammer murder and no trace on the hammer.”

“Quite so. It doesn't prove it wasn't used. But there might have beenstains, and that would have helped us. As a matter of fact there werenone. Then I examined the gun. They were buckshot cartridges, and, asSergeant Wilson pointed out, the triggers were wired together so that, ifyou pulled on the hinder one, both barrels were discharged. Whoever fixedthat up had made up his mind that he was going to take no chances ofmissing his man. The sawed gun was not more than two foot long—onecould carry it easily under one's coat. There was no complete maker'sname; but the printed letters P-E-N were on the fluting between thebarrels, and the rest of the name had been cut off by the saw.”

“A big P with a flourish above it, E and N smaller?” asked Holmes.

“Exactly.”

“Pennsylvania Small Arms Company—well-known American firm,” saidHolmes.

White Mason gazed at my friend as the little village practitioner looks atthe Harley Street specialist who by a word can solve the difficulties thatperplex him.

“That is very helpful, Mr. Holmes. No doubt you are right. Wonderful!Wonderful! Do you carry the names of all the gun makers in the world inyour memory?”

Holmes dismissed the subject with a wave.

“No doubt it is an American shotgun,” White Mason continued. “I seem tohave read that a sawed-off shotgun is a weapon used in some parts ofAmerica. Apart from the name upon the barrel, the idea had occurred to me.There is some evidence then, that this man who entered the house andkilled its master was an American.”

MacDonald shook his head. “Man, you are surely travelling overfast,” saidhe. “I have heard no evidence yet that any stranger was ever in the houseat all.”

“The open window, the blood on the sill, the queer card, the marks ofboots in the corner, the gun!”

“Nothing there that could not have been arranged. Mr. Douglas was anAmerican, or had lived long in America. So had Mr. Barker. You don't needto import an American from outside in order to account for Americandoings.”

“Ames, the butler—”

“What about him? Is he reliable?”

“Ten years with Sir Charles Chandos—as solid as a rock. He has beenwith Douglas ever since he took the Manor House five years ago. He hasnever seen a gun of this sort in the house.”

“The gun was made to conceal. That's why the barrels were sawed. It wouldfit into any box. How could he swear there was no such gun in the house?”

“Well, anyhow, he had never seen one.”

MacDonald shook his obstinate Scotch head. “I'm not convinced yet thatthere was ever anyone in the house,” said he. “I'm asking you toconseedar” (his accent became more Aberdonian as he lost himself in hisargument) “I'm asking you to conseedar what it involves if you supposethat this gun was ever brought into the house, and that all these strangethings were done by a person from outside. Oh, man, it's justinconceivable! It's clean against common sense! I put it to you, Mr.Holmes, judging it by what we have heard.”

“Well, state your case, Mr. Mac,” said Holmes in his most judicial style.

“The man is not a burglar, supposing that he ever existed. The ringbusiness and the card point to premeditated murder for some privatereason. Very good. Here is a man who slips into a house with thedeliberate intention of committing murder. He knows, if he knows anything,that he will have a deeficulty in making his escape, as the house issurrounded with water. What weapon would he choose? You would say the mostsilent in the world. Then he could hope when the deed was done to slipquickly from the window, to wade the moat, and to get away at his leisure.That's understandable. But is it understandable that he should go out ofhis way to bring with him the most noisy weapon he could select, knowingwell that it will fetch every human being in the house to the spot asquick as they can run, and that it is all odds that he will be seen beforehe can get across the moat? Is that credible, Mr. Holmes?”

“Well, you put the case strongly,” my friend replied thoughtfully. “Itcertainly needs a good deal of justification. May I ask, Mr. White Mason,whether you examined the farther side of the moat at once to see if therewere any signs of the man having climbed out from the water?”

“There were no signs, Mr. Holmes. But it is a stone ledge, and one couldhardly expect them.”

“No tracks or marks?”

“None.”

“Ha! Would there be any objection, Mr. White Mason, to our going down tothe house at once? There may possibly be some small point which might besuggestive.”

“I was going to propose it, Mr. Holmes; but I thought it well to put youin touch with all the facts before we go. I suppose if anything shouldstrike you—” White Mason looked doubtfully at the amateur.

“I have worked with Mr. Holmes before,” said Inspector MacDonald. “Heplays the game.”

“My own idea of the game, at any rate,” said Holmes, with a smile. “I gointo a case to help the ends of justice and the work of the police. If Ihave ever separated myself from the official force, it is because theyhave first separated themselves from me. I have no wish ever to score attheir expense. At the same time, Mr. White Mason, I claim the right towork in my own way and give my results at my own time—completerather than in stages.”

“I am sure we are honoured by your presence and to show you all we know,”said White Mason cordially. “Come along, Dr. Watson, and when the timecomes we'll all hope for a place in your book.”

We walked down the quaint village street with a row of pollarded elms oneach side of it. Just beyond were two ancient stone pillars,weather-stained and lichen-blotched, bearing upon their summits ashapeless something which had once been the rampant lion of Capus ofBirlstone. A short walk along the winding drive with such sward and oaksaround it as one only sees in rural England, then a sudden turn, and thelong, low Jacobean house of dingy, liver-coloured brick lay before us,with an old-fashioned garden of cut yews on each side of it. As weapproached it, there was the wooden drawbridge and the beautiful broadmoat as still and luminous as quicksilver in the cold, winter sunshine.

Three centuries had flowed past the old Manor House, centuries of birthsand of homecomings, of country dances and of the meetings of fox hunters.Strange that now in its old age this dark business should have cast itsshadow upon the venerable walls! And yet those strange, peaked roofs andquaint, overhung gables were a fitting covering to grim and terribleintrigue. As I looked at the deep-set windows and the long sweep of thedull-coloured, water-lapped front, I felt that no more fitting scene couldbe set for such a tragedy.

“That's the window,” said White Mason, “that one on the immediate right ofthe drawbridge. It's open just as it was found last night.”

“It looks rather narrow for a man to pass.”

“Well, it wasn't a fat man, anyhow. We don't need your deductions, Mr.Holmes, to tell us that. But you or I could squeeze through all right.”

Holmes walked to the edge of the moat and looked across. Then he examinedthe stone ledge and the grass border beyond it.

“I've had a good look, Mr. Holmes,” said White Mason. “There is nothingthere, no sign that anyone has landed—but why should he leave anysign?”

“Exactly. Why should he? Is the water always turbid?”

“Generally about this colour. The stream brings down the clay.”

“How deep is it?”

“About two feet at each side and three in the middle.”

“So we can put aside all idea of the man having been drowned in crossing.”

“No, a child could not be drowned in it.”

We walked across the drawbridge, and were admitted by a quaint, gnarled,dried-up person, who was the butler, Ames. The poor old fellow was whiteand quivering from the shock. The village sergeant, a tall, formal,melancholy man, still held his vigil in the room of Fate. The doctor haddeparted.

“Anything fresh, Sergeant Wilson?” asked White Mason.

“No, sir.”

“Then you can go home. You've had enough. We can send for you if we wantyou. The butler had better wait outside. Tell him to warn Mr. CecilBarker, Mrs. Douglas, and the housekeeper that we may want a word withthem presently. Now, gentlemen, perhaps you will allow me to give you theviews I have formed first, and then you will be able to arrive at yourown.”

He impressed me, this country specialist. He had a solid grip of fact anda cool, clear, common-sense brain, which should take him some way in hisprofession. Holmes listened to him intently, with no sign of thatimpatience which the official exponent too often produced.

“Is it suicide, or is it murder—that's our first question,gentlemen, is it not? If it were suicide, then we have to believe thatthis man began by taking off his wedding ring and concealing it; that hethen came down here in his dressing gown, trampled mud into a cornerbehind the curtain in order to give the idea someone had waited for him,opened the window, put blood on the—”

“We can surely dismiss that,” said MacDonald.

“So I think. Suicide is out of the question. Then a murder has been done.What we have to determine is, whether it was done by someone outside orinside the house.”

“Well, let's hear the argument.”

“There are considerable difficulties both ways, and yet one or the otherit must be. We will suppose first that some person or persons inside thehouse did the crime. They got this man down here at a time when everythingwas still and yet no one was asleep. They then did the deed with thequeerest and noisiest weapon in the world so as to tell everyone what hadhappened—a weapon that was never seen in the house before. That doesnot seem a very likely start, does it?”

“No, it does not.”

“Well, then, everyone is agreed that after the alarm was given only aminute at the most had passed before the whole household—not Mr.Cecil Barker alone, though he claims to have been the first, but Ames andall of them were on the spot. Do you tell me that in that time the guiltyperson managed to make footmarks in the corner, open the window, mark thesill with blood, take the wedding ring off the dead man's finger, and allthe rest of it? It's impossible!”

“You put it very clearly,” said Holmes. “I am inclined to agree with you.”

“Well, then, we are driven back to the theory that it was done by someonefrom outside. We are still faced with some big difficulties; but anyhowthey have ceased to be impossibilities. The man got into the house betweenfour-thirty and six; that is to say, between dusk and the time when thebridge was raised. There had been some visitors, and the door was open; sothere was nothing to prevent him. He may have been a common burglar, or hemay have had some private grudge against Mr. Douglas. Since Mr. Douglashas spent most of his life in America, and this shotgun seems to be anAmerican weapon, it would seem that the private grudge is the more likelytheory. He slipped into this room because it was the first he came to, andhe hid behind the curtain. There he remained until past eleven at night.At that time Mr. Douglas entered the room. It was a short interview, ifthere were any interview at all; for Mrs. Douglas declares that herhusband had not left her more than a few minutes when she heard the shot.”

“The candle shows that,” said Holmes.

“Exactly. The candle, which was a new one, is not burned more than half aninch. He must have placed it on the table before he was attacked;otherwise, of course, it would have fallen when he fell. This shows thathe was not attacked the instant that he entered the room. When Mr. Barkerarrived the candle was lit and the lamp was out.”

“That's all clear enough.”

“Well, now, we can reconstruct things on those lines. Mr. Douglas entersthe room. He puts down the candle. A man appears from behind the curtain.He is armed with this gun. He demands the wedding ring—Heaven onlyknows why, but so it must have been. Mr. Douglas gave it up. Then eitherin cold blood or in the course of a struggle—Douglas may havegripped the hammer that was found upon the mat—he shot Douglas inthis horrible way. He dropped his gun and also it would seem this queercard—V.V. 341, whatever that may mean—and he made his escapethrough the window and across the moat at the very moment when CecilBarker was discovering the crime. How's that, Mr. Holmes?”

“Very interesting, but just a little unconvincing.”

“Man, it would be absolute nonsense if it wasn't that anything else iseven worse!” cried MacDonald. “Somebody killed the man, and whoever it wasI could clearly prove to you that he should have done it some other way.What does he mean by allowing his retreat to be cut off like that? Whatdoes he mean by using a shotgun when silence was his one chance of escape?Come, Mr. Holmes, it's up to you to give us a lead, since you say Mr.White Mason's theory is unconvincing.”

Holmes had sat intently observant during this long discussion, missing noword that was said, with his keen eyes darting to right and to left, andhis forehead wrinkled with speculation.

“I should like a few more facts before I get so far as a theory, Mr. Mac,”said he, kneeling down beside the body. “Dear me! these injuries arereally appalling. Can we have the butler in for a moment?... Ames, Iunderstand that you have often seen this very unusual mark—a brandedtriangle inside a circle—upon Mr. Douglas's forearm?”

“Frequently, sir.”

“You never heard any speculation as to what it meant?”

“No, sir.”

“It must have caused great pain when it was inflicted. It is undoubtedly aburn. Now, I observe, Ames, that there is a small piece of plaster at theangle of Mr. Douglas's jaw. Did you observe that in life?”

“Yes, sir, he cut himself in shaving yesterday morning.”

“Did you ever know him to cut himself in shaving before?”

“Not for a very long time, sir.”

“Suggestive!” said Holmes. “It may, of course, be a mere coincidence, orit may point to some nervousness which would indicate that he had reasonto apprehend danger. Had you noticed anything unusual in his conduct,yesterday, Ames?”

“It struck me that he was a little restless and excited, sir.”

“Ha! The attack may not have been entirely unexpected. We do seem to makea little progress, do we not? Perhaps you would rather do the questioning,Mr. Mac?”

“No, Mr. Holmes, it's in better hands than mine.”

“Well, then, we will pass to this card—V.V. 341. It is roughcardboard. Have you any of the sort in the house?”

“I don't think so.”

Holmes walked across to the desk and dabbed a little ink from each bottleon to the blotting paper. “It was not printed in this room,” he said;“this is black ink and the other purplish. It was done by a thick pen, andthese are fine. No, it was done elsewhere, I should say. Can you makeanything of the inscription, Ames?”

“No, sir, nothing.”

“What do you think, Mr. Mac?”

“It gives me the impression of a secret society of some sort; the samewith his badge upon the forearm.”

“That's my idea, too,” said White Mason.

“Well, we can adopt it as a working hypothesis and then see how far ourdifficulties disappear. An agent from such a society makes his way intothe house, waits for Mr. Douglas, blows his head nearly off with thisweapon, and escapes by wading the moat, after leaving a card beside thedead man, which will, when mentioned in the papers, tell other members ofthe society that vengeance has been done. That all hangs together. But whythis gun, of all weapons?”

“Exactly.”

“And why the missing ring?”

“Quite so.”

“And why no arrest? It's past two now. I take it for granted that sincedawn every constable within forty miles has been looking out for a wetstranger?”

“That is so, Mr. Holmes.”

“Well, unless he has a burrow close by or a change of clothes ready, theycan hardly miss him. And yet they HAVE missed him up to now!” Holmes hadgone to the window and was examining with his lens the blood mark on thesill. “It is clearly the tread of a shoe. It is remarkably broad; asplay-foot, one would say. Curious, because, so far as one can trace anyfootmark in this mud-stained corner, one would say it was a more shapelysole. However, they are certainly very indistinct. What's this under theside table?”

“Mr. Douglas's dumb-bells,” said Ames.

“Dumb-bell—there's only one. Where's the other?”

“I don't know, Mr. Holmes. There may have been only one. I have notnoticed them for months.”

“One dumb-bell—” Holmes said seriously; but his remarks wereinterrupted by a sharp knock at the door.

A tall, sunburned, capable-looking, clean-shaved man looked in at us. Ihad no difficulty in guessing that it was the Cecil Barker of whom I hadheard. His masterful eyes travelled quickly with a questioning glance fromface to face.

“Sorry to interrupt your consultation,” said he, “but you should hear thelatest news.”

“An arrest?”

“No such luck. But they've found his bicycle. The fellow left his bicyclebehind him. Come and have a look. It is within a hundred yards of the halldoor.”

We found three or four grooms and idlers standing in the drive inspectinga bicycle which had been drawn out from a clump of evergreens in which ithad been concealed. It was a well used Rudge-Whitworth, splashed as from aconsiderable journey. There was a saddlebag with spanner and oilcan, butno clue as to the owner.

“It would be a grand help to the police,” said the inspector, “if thesethings were numbered and registered. But we must be thankful for whatwe've got. If we can't find where he went to, at least we are likely toget where he came from. But what in the name of all that is wonderful madethe fellow leave it behind? And how in the world has he got away withoutit? We don't seem to get a gleam of light in the case, Mr. Holmes.”

“Don't we?” my friend answered thoughtfully. “I wonder!”

Chapter 5 — The People of the Drama

“Have you seen all you want of the study?” asked White Mason as wereentered the house.

“For the time,” said the inspector, and Holmes nodded.

“Then perhaps you would now like to hear the evidence of some of thepeople in the house. We could use the dining room, Ames. Please comeyourself first and tell us what you know.”

The butler's account was a simple and a clear one, and he gave aconvincing impression of sincerity. He had been engaged five years before,when Douglas first came to Birlstone. He understood that Mr. Douglas was arich gentleman who had made his money in America. He had been a kind andconsiderate employer—not quite what Ames was used to, perhaps; butone can't have everything. He never saw any signs of apprehension in Mr.Douglas: on the contrary, he was the most fearless man he had ever known.He ordered the drawbridge to be pulled up every night because it was theancient custom of the old house, and he liked to keep the old ways up.

Mr. Douglas seldom went to London or left the village; but on the daybefore the crime he had been shopping at Tunbridge Wells. He (Ames) hadobserved some restlessness and excitement on the part of Mr. Douglas thatday; for he had seemed impatient and irritable, which was unusual withhim. He had not gone to bed that night; but was in the pantry at the backof the house, putting away the silver, when he heard the bell ringviolently. He heard no shot; but it was hardly possible he would, as thepantry and kitchens were at the very back of the house and there wereseveral closed doors and a long passage between. The housekeeper had comeout of her room, attracted by the violent ringing of the bell. They hadgone to the front of the house together.

As they reached the bottom of the stairs he had seen Mrs. Douglas comingdown it. No, she was not hurrying; it did not seem to him that she wasparticularly agitated. Just as she reached the bottom of the stair Mr.Barker had rushed out of the study. He had stopped Mrs. Douglas and beggedher to go back.

“For God's sake, go back to your room!” he cried. “Poor Jack is dead! Youcan do nothing. For God's sake, go back!”

After some persuasion upon the stairs Mrs. Douglas had gone back. She didnot scream. She made no outcry whatever. Mrs. Allen, the housekeeper, hadtaken her upstairs and stayed with her in the bedroom. Ames and Mr. Barkerhad then returned to the study, where they had found everything exactly asthe police had seen it. The candle was not lit at that time; but the lampwas burning. They had looked out of the window; but the night was verydark and nothing could be seen or heard. They had then rushed out into thehall, where Ames had turned the windlass which lowered the drawbridge. Mr.Barker had then hurried off to get the police.

Such, in its essentials, was the evidence of the butler.

The account of Mrs. Allen, the housekeeper, was, so far as it went, acorroboration of that of her fellow servant. The housekeeper's room wasrather nearer to the front of the house than the pantry in which Ames hadbeen working. She was preparing to go to bed when the loud ringing of thebell had attracted her attention. She was a little hard of hearing.Perhaps that was why she had not heard the shot; but in any case the studywas a long way off. She remembered hearing some sound which she imaginedto be the slamming of a door. That was a good deal earlier—half anhour at least before the ringing of the bell. When Mr. Ames ran to thefront she went with him. She saw Mr. Barker, very pale and excited, comeout of the study. He intercepted Mrs. Douglas, who was coming down thestairs. He entreated her to go back, and she answered him, but what shesaid could not be heard.

“Take her up! Stay with her!” he had said to Mrs. Allen.

She had therefore taken her to the bedroom, and endeavoured to soothe her.She was greatly excited, trembling all over, but made no other attempt togo downstairs. She just sat in her dressing gown by her bedroom fire, withher head sunk in her hands. Mrs. Allen stayed with her most of the night.As to the other servants, they had all gone to bed, and the alarm did notreach them until just before the police arrived. They slept at the extremeback of the house, and could not possibly have heard anything.

So far the housekeeper could add nothing on cross-examination savelamentations and expressions of amazement.

Cecil Barker succeeded Mrs. Allen as a witness. As to the occurrences ofthe night before, he had very little to add to what he had already toldthe police. Personally, he was convinced that the murderer had escaped bythe window. The bloodstain was conclusive, in his opinion, on that point.Besides, as the bridge was up, there was no other possible way ofescaping. He could not explain what had become of the assassin or why hehad not taken his bicycle, if it were indeed his. He could not possiblyhave been drowned in the moat, which was at no place more than three feetdeep.

In his own mind he had a very definite theory about the murder. Douglaswas a reticent man, and there were some chapters in his life of which henever spoke. He had emigrated to America when he was a very young man. Hehad prospered well, and Barker had first met him in California, where theyhad become partners in a successful mining claim at a place called BenitoCanyon. They had done very well; but Douglas had suddenly sold out andstarted for England. He was a widower at that time. Barker had afterwardsrealized his money and come to live in London. Thus they had renewed theirfriendship.

Douglas had given him the impression that some danger was hanging over hishead, and he had always looked upon his sudden departure from California,and also his renting a house in so quiet a place in England, as beingconnected with this peril. He imagined that some secret society, someimplacable organization, was on Douglas's track, which would never restuntil it killed him. Some remarks of his had given him this idea; thoughhe had never told him what the society was, nor how he had come to offendit. He could only suppose that the legend upon the placard had somereference to this secret society.

“How long were you with Douglas in California?” asked Inspector MacDonald.

“Five years altogether.”

“He was a bachelor, you say?”

“A widower.”

“Have you ever heard where his first wife came from?”

“No, I remember his saying that she was of German extraction, and I haveseen her portrait. She was a very beautiful woman. She died of typhoid theyear before I met him.”

“You don't associate his past with any particular part of America?”

“I have heard him talk of Chicago. He knew that city well and had workedthere. I have heard him talk of the coal and iron districts. He hadtravelled a good deal in his time.”

“Was he a politician? Had this secret society to do with politics?”

“No, he cared nothing about politics.”

“You have no reason to think it was criminal?”

“On the contrary, I never met a straighter man in my life.”

“Was there anything curious about his life in California?”

“He liked best to stay and to work at our claim in the mountains. He wouldnever go where other men were if he could help it. That's why I firstthought that someone was after him. Then when he left so suddenly forEurope I made sure that it was so. I believe that he had a warning of somesort. Within a week of his leaving half a dozen men were inquiring forhim.”

“What sort of men?”

“Well, they were a mighty hard-looking crowd. They came up to the claimand wanted to know where he was. I told them that he was gone to Europeand that I did not know where to find him. They meant him no good—itwas easy to see that.”

“Were these men Americans—Californians?”

“Well, I don't know about Californians. They were Americans, all right.But they were not miners. I don't know what they were, and was very gladto see their backs.”

“That was six years ago?”

“Nearer seven.”

“And then you were together five years in California, so that thisbusiness dates back not less than eleven years at the least?”

“That is so.”

“It must be a very serious feud that would be kept up with suchearnestness for as long as that. It would be no light thing that wouldgive rise to it.”

“I think it shadowed his whole life. It was never quite out of his mind.”

“But if a man had a danger hanging over him, and knew what it was, don'tyou think he would turn to the police for protection?”

“Maybe it was some danger that he could not be protected against. There'sone thing you should know. He always went about armed. His revolver wasnever out of his pocket. But, by bad luck, he was in his dressing gown andhad left it in the bedroom last night. Once the bridge was up, I guess hethought he was safe.”

“I should like these dates a little clearer,” said MacDonald. “It is quitesix years since Douglas left California. You followed him next year, didyou not?”

“That is so.”

“And he had been married five years. You must have returned about the timeof his marriage.”

“About a month before. I was his best man.”

“Did you know Mrs. Douglas before her marriage?”

“No, I did not. I had been away from England for ten years.”

“But you have seen a good deal of her since.”

Barker looked sternly at the detective. “I have seen a good deal of HIMsince,” he answered. “If I have seen her, it is because you cannot visit aman without knowing his wife. If you imagine there is any connection—”

“I imagine nothing, Mr. Barker. I am bound to make every inquiry which canbear upon the case. But I mean no offense.”

“Some inquiries are offensive,” Barker answered angrily.

“It's only the facts that we want. It is in your interest and everyone'sinterest that they should be cleared up. Did Mr. Douglas entirely approveyour friendship with his wife?”

Barker grew paler, and his great, strong hands were clasped convulsivelytogether. “You have no right to ask such questions!” he cried. “What hasthis to do with the matter you are investigating?”

“I must repeat the question.”

“Well, I refuse to answer.”

“You can refuse to answer; but you must be aware that your refusal is initself an answer, for you would not refuse if you had not something toconceal.”

Barker stood for a moment with his face set grimly and his strong blackeyebrows drawn low in intense thought. Then he looked up with a smile.“Well, I guess you gentlemen are only doing your clear duty after all, andI have no right to stand in the way of it. I'd only ask you not to worryMrs. Douglas over this matter; for she has enough upon her just now. I maytell you that poor Douglas had just one fault in the world, and that washis jealousy. He was fond of me—no man could be fonder of a friend.And he was devoted to his wife. He loved me to come here, and was foreversending for me. And yet if his wife and I talked together or there seemedany sympathy between us, a kind of wave of jealousy would pass over him,and he would be off the handle and saying the wildest things in a moment.More than once I've sworn off coming for that reason, and then he wouldwrite me such penitent, imploring letters that I just had to. But you cantake it from me, gentlemen, if it was my last word, that no man ever had amore loving, faithful wife—and I can say also no friend could bemore loyal than I!”

It was spoken with fervour and feeling, and yet Inspector MacDonald couldnot dismiss the subject.

“You are aware,” said he, “that the dead man's wedding ring has been takenfrom his finger?”

“So it appears,” said Barker.

“What do you mean by 'appears'? You know it as a fact.”

The man seemed confused and undecided. “When I said 'appears' I meant thatit was conceivable that he had himself taken off the ring.”

“The mere fact that the ring should be absent, whoever may have removedit, would suggest to anyone's mind, would it not, that the marriage andthe tragedy were connected?”

Barker shrugged his broad shoulders. “I can't profess to say what itmeans,” he answered. “But if you mean to hint that it could reflect in anyway upon this lady's honour”—his eyes blazed for an instant, andthen with an evident effort he got a grip upon his own emotions—“well,you are on the wrong track, that's all.”

“I don't know that I've anything else to ask you at present,” saidMacDonald, coldly.

“There was one small point,” remarked Sherlock Holmes. “When you enteredthe room there was only a candle lighted on the table, was there not?”

“Yes, that was so.”

“By its light you saw that some terrible incident had occurred?”

“Exactly.”

“You at once rang for help?”

“Yes.”

“And it arrived very speedily?”

“Within a minute or so.”

“And yet when they arrived they found that the candle was out and that thelamp had been lighted. That seems very remarkable.”

Again Barker showed some signs of indecision. “I don't see that it wasremarkable, Mr. Holmes,” he answered after a pause. “The candle threw avery bad light. My first thought was to get a better one. The lamp was onthe table; so I lit it.”

“And blew out the candle?”

“Exactly.”

Holmes asked no further question, and Barker, with a deliberate look fromone to the other of us, which had, as it seemed to me, something ofdefiance in it, turned and left the room.

Inspector MacDonald had sent up a note to the effect that he would waitupon Mrs. Douglas in her room; but she had replied that she would meet usin the dining room. She entered now, a tall and beautiful woman of thirty,reserved and self-possessed to a remarkable degree, very different fromthe tragic and distracted figure I had pictured. It is true that her facewas pale and drawn, like that of one who has endured a great shock; buther manner was composed, and the finely moulded hand which she rested uponthe edge of the table was as steady as my own. Her sad, appealing eyestravelled from one to the other of us with a curiously inquisitiveexpression. That questioning gaze transformed itself suddenly into abruptspeech.

“Have you found anything out yet?” she asked.

Was it my imagination that there was an undertone of fear rather than ofhope in the question?

“We have taken every possible step, Mrs. Douglas,” said the inspector.“You may rest assured that nothing will be neglected.”

“Spare no money,” she said in a dead, even tone. “It is my desire thatevery possible effort should be made.”

“Perhaps you can tell us something which may throw some light upon thematter.”

“I fear not; but all I know is at your service.”

“We have heard from Mr. Cecil Barker that you did not actually see—thatyou were never in the room where the tragedy occurred?”

“No, he turned me back upon the stairs. He begged me to return to myroom.”

“Quite so. You had heard the shot, and you had at once come down.”

“I put on my dressing gown and then came down.”

“How long was it after hearing the shot that you were stopped on the stairby Mr. Barker?”

“It may have been a couple of minutes. It is so hard to reckon time atsuch a moment. He implored me not to go on. He assured me that I could donothing. Then Mrs. Allen, the housekeeper, led me upstairs again. It wasall like some dreadful dream.”

“Can you give us any idea how long your husband had been downstairs beforeyou heard the shot?”

“No, I cannot say. He went from his dressing room, and I did not hear himgo. He did the round of the house every night, for he was nervous of fire.It is the only thing that I have ever known him nervous of.”

“That is just the point which I want to come to, Mrs. Douglas. You haveknown your husband only in England, have you not?”

“Yes, we have been married five years.”

“Have you heard him speak of anything which occurred in America and mightbring some danger upon him?”

Mrs. Douglas thought earnestly before she answered. “Yes,” she said atlast, “I have always felt that there was a danger hanging over him. Herefused to discuss it with me. It was not from want of confidence in me—therewas the most complete love and confidence between us—but it was outof his desire to keep all alarm away from me. He thought I should broodover it if I knew all, and so he was silent.”

“How did you know it, then?”

Mrs. Douglas's face lit with a quick smile. “Can a husband ever carryabout a secret all his life and a woman who loves him have no suspicion ofit? I knew it by his refusal to talk about some episodes in his Americanlife. I knew it by certain precautions he took. I knew it by certain wordshe let fall. I knew it by the way he looked at unexpected strangers. I wasperfectly certain that he had some powerful enemies, that he believed theywere on his track, and that he was always on his guard against them. I wasso sure of it that for years I have been terrified if ever he came homelater than was expected.”

“Might I ask,” asked Holmes, “what the words were which attracted yourattention?”

“The Valley of Fear,” the lady answered. “That was an expression he hasused when I questioned him. 'I have been in the Valley of Fear. I am notout of it yet.'—'Are we never to get out of the Valley of Fear?' Ihave asked him when I have seen him more serious than usual. 'Sometimes Ithink that we never shall,' he has answered.”

“Surely you asked him what he meant by the Valley of Fear?”

“I did; but his face would become very grave and he would shake his head.'It is bad enough that one of us should have been in its shadow,' he said.'Please God it shall never fall upon you!' It was some real valley inwhich he had lived and in which something terrible had occurred to him, ofthat I am certain; but I can tell you no more.”

“And he never mentioned any names?”

“Yes, he was delirious with fever once when he had his hunting accidentthree years ago. Then I remember that there was a name that camecontinually to his lips. He spoke it with anger and a sort of horror.McGinty was the name—Bodymaster McGinty. I asked him when herecovered who Bodymaster McGinty was, and whose body he was master of.'Never of mine, thank God!' he answered with a laugh, and that was all Icould get from him. But there is a connection between Bodymaster McGintyand the Valley of Fear.”

“There is one other point,” said Inspector MacDonald. “You met Mr. Douglasin a boarding house in London, did you not, and became engaged to himthere? Was there any romance, anything secret or mysterious, about thewedding?”

“There was romance. There is always romance. There was nothingmysterious.”

“He had no rival?”

“No, I was quite free.”

“You have heard, no doubt, that his wedding ring has been taken. Does thatsuggest anything to you? Suppose that some enemy of his old life hadtracked him down and committed this crime, what possible reason could hehave for taking his wedding ring?”

For an instant I could have sworn that the faintest shadow of a smileflickered over the woman's lips.

“I really cannot tell,” she answered. “It is certainly a mostextraordinary thing.”

“Well, we will not detain you any longer, and we are sorry to have put youto this trouble at such a time,” said the inspector. “There are some otherpoints, no doubt; but we can refer to you as they arise.”

She rose, and I was again conscious of that quick, questioning glance withwhich she had just surveyed us. “What impression has my evidence made uponyou?” The question might as well have been spoken. Then, with a bow, sheswept from the room.

“She's a beautiful woman—a very beautiful woman,” said MacDonaldthoughtfully, after the door had closed behind her. “This man Barker hascertainly been down here a good deal. He is a man who might be attractiveto a woman. He admits that the dead man was jealous, and maybe he knewbest himself what cause he had for jealousy. Then there's that weddingring. You can't get past that. The man who tears a wedding ring off a deadman's—What do you say to it, Mr. Holmes?”

My friend had sat with his head upon his hands, sunk in the deepestthought. Now he rose and rang the bell. “Ames,” he said, when the butlerentered, “where is Mr. Cecil Barker now?”

“I'll see, sir.”

He came back in a moment to say that Barker was in the garden.

“Can you remember, Ames, what Mr. Barker had on his feet last night whenyou joined him in the study?”

“Yes, Mr. Holmes. He had a pair of bedroom slippers. I brought him hisboots when he went for the police.”

“Where are the slippers now?”

“They are still under the chair in the hall.”

“Very good, Ames. It is, of course, important for us to know which tracksmay be Mr. Barker's and which from outside.”

“Yes, sir. I may say that I noticed that the slippers were stained withblood—so indeed were my own.”

“That is natural enough, considering the condition of the room. Very good,Ames. We will ring if we want you.”

A few minutes later we were in the study. Holmes had brought with him thecarpet slippers from the hall. As Ames had observed, the soles of bothwere dark with blood.

“Strange!” murmured Holmes, as he stood in the light of the window andexamined them minutely. “Very strange indeed!”

Stooping with one of his quick feline pounces, he placed the slipper uponthe blood mark on the sill. It exactly corresponded. He smiled in silenceat his colleagues.

The inspector was transfigured with excitement. His native accent rattledlike a stick upon railings.

“Man,” he cried, “there's not a doubt of it! Barker has just marked thewindow himself. It's a good deal broader than any bootmark. I mind thatyou said it was a splay-foot, and here's the explanation. But what's thegame, Mr. Holmes—what's the game?”

“Ay, what's the game?” my friend repeated thoughtfully.

White Mason chuckled and rubbed his fat hands together in his professionalsatisfaction. “I said it was a snorter!” he cried. “And a real snorter itis!”

Chapter 6 — A Dawning Light

The three detectives had many matters of detail into which to inquire; soI returned alone to our modest quarters at the village inn. But beforedoing so I took a stroll in the curious old-world garden which flanked thehouse. Rows of very ancient yew trees cut into strange designs girded itround. Inside was a beautiful stretch of lawn with an old sundial in themiddle, the whole effect so soothing and restful that it was welcome to mysomewhat jangled nerves.

In that deeply peaceful atmosphere one could forget, or remember only assome fantastic nightmare, that darkened study with the sprawling,bloodstained figure on the floor. And yet, as I strolled round it andtried to steep my soul in its gentle balm, a strange incident occurred,which brought me back to the tragedy and left a sinister impression in mymind.

I have said that a decoration of yew trees circled the garden. At the endfarthest from the house they thickened into a continuous hedge. On theother side of this hedge, concealed from the eyes of anyone approachingfrom the direction of the house, there was a stone seat. As I approachedthe spot I was aware of voices, some remark in the deep tones of a man,answered by a little ripple of feminine laughter.

An instant later I had come round the end of the hedge and my eyes litupon Mrs. Douglas and the man Barker before they were aware of mypresence. Her appearance gave me a shock. In the dining-room she had beendemure and discreet. Now all pretense of grief had passed away from her.Her eyes shone with the joy of living, and her face still quivered withamusement at some remark of her companion. He sat forward, his handsclasped and his forearms on his knees, with an answering smile upon hisbold, handsome face. In an instant—but it was just one instant toolate—they resumed their solemn masks as my figure came into view. Ahurried word or two passed between them, and then Barker rose and cametowards me.

“Excuse me, sir,” said he, “but am I addressing Dr. Watson?”

I bowed with a coldness which showed, I dare say, very plainly theimpression which had been produced upon my mind.

“We thought that it was probably you, as your friendship with Mr. SherlockHolmes is so well known. Would you mind coming over and speaking to Mrs.Douglas for one instant?”

I followed him with a dour face. Very clearly I could see in my mind's eyethat shattered figure on the floor. Here within a few hours of the tragedywere his wife and his nearest friend laughing together behind a bush inthe garden which had been his. I greeted the lady with reserve. I hadgrieved with her grief in the dining room. Now I met her appealing gazewith an unresponsive eye.

“I fear that you think me callous and hard-hearted,” said she.

I shrugged my shoulders. “It is no business of mine,” said I.

“Perhaps some day you will do me justice. If you only realized—”

“There is no need why Dr. Watson should realize,” said Barker quickly. “Ashe has himself said, it is no possible business of his.”

“Exactly,” said I, “and so I will beg leave to resume my walk.”

“One moment, Dr. Watson,” cried the woman in a pleading voice. “There isone question which you can answer with more authority than anyone else inthe world, and it may make a very great difference to me. You know Mr.Holmes and his relations with the police better than anyone else can.Supposing that a matter were brought confidentially to his knowledge, isit absolutely necessary that he should pass it on to the detectives?”

“Yes, that's it,” said Barker eagerly. “Is he on his own or is he entirelyin with them?”

“I really don't know that I should be justified in discussing such apoint.”

“I beg—I implore that you will, Dr. Watson! I assure you that youwill be helping us—helping me greatly if you will guide us on thatpoint.”

There was such a ring of sincerity in the woman's voice that for theinstant I forgot all about her levity and was moved only to do her will.

“Mr. Holmes is an independent investigator,” I said. “He is his ownmaster, and would act as his own judgment directed. At the same time, hewould naturally feel loyalty towards the officials who were working on thesame case, and he would not conceal from them anything which would helpthem in bringing a criminal to justice. Beyond this I can say nothing, andI would refer you to Mr. Holmes himself if you wanted fuller information.”

So saying I raised my hat and went upon my way, leaving them still seatedbehind that concealing hedge. I looked back as I rounded the far end ofit, and saw that they were still talking very earnestly together, and, asthey were gazing after me, it was clear that it was our interview that wasthe subject of their debate.

“I wish none of their confidences,” said Holmes, when I reported to himwhat had occurred. He had spent the whole afternoon at the Manor House inconsultation with his two colleagues, and returned about five with aravenous appetite for a high tea which I had ordered for him. “Noconfidences, Watson; for they are mighty awkward if it comes to an arrestfor conspiracy and murder.”

“You think it will come to that?”

He was in his most cheerful and debonair humour. “My dear Watson, when Ihave exterminated that fourth egg I shall be ready to put you in touchwith the whole situation. I don't say that we have fathomed it—farfrom it—but when we have traced the missing dumb-bell—”

“The dumb-bell!”

“Dear me, Watson, is it possible that you have not penetrated the factthat the case hangs upon the missing dumb-bell? Well, well, you need notbe downcast; for between ourselves I don't think that either Inspector Macor the excellent local practitioner has grasped the overwhelmingimportance of this incident. One dumb-bell, Watson! Consider an athletewith one dumb-bell! Picture to yourself the unilateral development, theimminent danger of a spinal curvature. Shocking, Watson, shocking!”

He sat with his mouth full of toast and his eyes sparkling with mischief,watching my intellectual entanglement. The mere sight of his excellentappetite was an assurance of success; for I had very clear recollectionsof days and nights without a thought of food, when his baffled mind hadchafed before some problem while his thin, eager features became moreattenuated with the asceticism of complete mental concentration. Finallyhe lit his pipe, and sitting in the inglenook of the old village inn hetalked slowly and at random about his case, rather as one who thinks aloudthan as one who makes a considered statement.

“A lie, Watson—a great, big, thumping, obtrusive, uncompromising lie—that'swhat meets us on the threshold! There is our starting point. The wholestory told by Barker is a lie. But Barker's story is corroborated by Mrs.Douglas. Therefore she is lying also. They are both lying, and in aconspiracy. So now we have the clear problem. Why are they lying, and whatis the truth which they are trying so hard to conceal? Let us try, Watson,you and I, if we can get behind the lie and reconstruct the truth.

“How do I know that they are lying? Because it is a clumsy fabricationwhich simply could not be true. Consider! According to the story given tous, the assassin had less than a minute after the murder had beencommitted to take that ring, which was under another ring, from the deadman's finger, to replace the other ring—a thing which he wouldsurely never have done—and to put that singular card beside hisvictim. I say that this was obviously impossible.

“You may argue—but I have too much respect for your judgment,Watson, to think that you will do so—that the ring may have beentaken before the man was killed. The fact that the candle had been litonly a short time shows that there had been no lengthy interview. WasDouglas, from what we hear of his fearless character, a man who would belikely to give up his wedding ring at such short notice, or could weconceive of his giving it up at all? No, no, Watson, the assassin wasalone with the dead man for some time with the lamp lit. Of that I have nodoubt at all.

“But the gunshot was apparently the cause of death. Therefore the shotmust have been fired some time earlier than we are told. But there couldbe no mistake about such a matter as that. We are in the presence,therefore, of a deliberate conspiracy upon the part of the two people whoheard the gunshot—of the man Barker and of the woman Douglas. Whenon the top of this I am able to show that the blood mark on the windowsillwas deliberately placed there by Barker, in order to give a false clue tothe police, you will admit that the case grows dark against him.

“Now we have to ask ourselves at what hour the murder actually did occur.Up to half-past ten the servants were moving about the house; so it wascertainly not before that time. At a quarter to eleven they had all goneto their rooms with the exception of Ames, who was in the pantry. I havebeen trying some experiments after you left us this afternoon, and I findthat no noise which MacDonald can make in the study can penetrate to me inthe pantry when the doors are all shut.

“It is otherwise, however, from the housekeeper's room. It is not so fardown the corridor, and from it I could vaguely hear a voice when it wasvery loudly raised. The sound from a shotgun is to some extent muffledwhen the discharge is at very close range, as it undoubtedly was in thisinstance. It would not be very loud, and yet in the silence of the nightit should have easily penetrated to Mrs. Allen's room. She is, as she hastold us, somewhat deaf; but none the less she mentioned in her evidencethat she did hear something like a door slamming half an hour before thealarm was given. Half an hour before the alarm was given would be aquarter to eleven. I have no doubt that what she heard was the report ofthe gun, and that this was the real instant of the murder.

“If this is so, we have now to determine what Barker and Mrs. Douglas,presuming that they are not the actual murderers, could have been doingfrom quarter to eleven, when the sound of the shot brought them down,until quarter past eleven, when they rang the bell and summoned theservants. What were they doing, and why did they not instantly give thealarm? That is the question which faces us, and when it has been answeredwe shall surely have gone some way to solve our problem.”

“I am convinced myself,” said I, “that there is an understanding betweenthose two people. She must be a heartless creature to sit laughing at somejest within a few hours of her husband's murder.”

“Exactly. She does not shine as a wife even in her own account of whatoccurred. I am not a whole-souled admirer of womankind, as you are aware,Watson, but my experience of life has taught me that there are few wives,having any regard for their husbands, who would let any man's spoken wordstand between them and that husband's dead body. Should I ever marry,Watson, I should hope to inspire my wife with some feeling which wouldprevent her from being walked off by a housekeeper when my corpse waslying within a few yards of her. It was badly stage-managed; for even therawest investigators must be struck by the absence of the usual feminineululation. If there had been nothing else, this incident alone would havesuggested a prearranged conspiracy to my mind.”

“You think then, definitely, that Barker and Mrs. Douglas are guilty ofthe murder?”

“There is an appalling directness about your questions, Watson,” saidHolmes, shaking his pipe at me. “They come at me like bullets. If you putit that Mrs. Douglas and Barker know the truth about the murder, and areconspiring to conceal it, then I can give you a whole-souled answer. I amsure they do. But your more deadly proposition is not so clear. Let us fora moment consider the difficulties which stand in the way.

“We will suppose that this couple are united by the bonds of a guiltylove, and that they have determined to get rid of the man who standsbetween them. It is a large supposition; for discreet inquiry amongservants and others has failed to corroborate it in any way. On thecontrary, there is a good deal of evidence that the Douglases were veryattached to each other.”

“That, I am sure, cannot be true,” said I, thinking of the beautifulsmiling face in the garden.

“Well at least they gave that impression. However, we will suppose thatthey are an extraordinarily astute couple, who deceive everyone upon thispoint, and conspire to murder the husband. He happens to be a man overwhose head some danger hangs—”

“We have only their word for that.”

Holmes looked thoughtful. “I see, Watson. You are sketching out a theoryby which everything they say from the beginning is false. According toyour idea, there was never any hidden menace, or secret society, or Valleyof Fear, or Boss MacSomebody, or anything else. Well, that is a goodsweeping generalization. Let us see what that brings us to. They inventthis theory to account for the crime. They then play up to the idea byleaving this bicycle in the park as proof of the existence of someoutsider. The stain on the windowsill conveys the same idea. So does thecard on the body, which might have been prepared in the house. That allfits into your hypothesis, Watson. But now we come on the nasty, angular,uncompromising bits which won't slip into their places. Why a cut-offshotgun of all weapons—and an American one at that? How could theybe so sure that the sound of it would not bring someone on to them? It's amere chance as it is that Mrs. Allen did not start out to inquire for theslamming door. Why did your guilty couple do all this, Watson?”

“I confess that I can't explain it.”

“Then again, if a woman and her lover conspire to murder a husband, arethey going to advertise their guilt by ostentatiously removing his weddingring after his death? Does that strike you as very probable, Watson?”

“No, it does not.”

“And once again, if the thought of leaving a bicycle concealed outside hadoccurred to you, would it really have seemed worth doing when the dullestdetective would naturally say this is an obvious blind, as the bicycle isthe first thing which the fugitive needed in order to make his escape.”

“I can conceive of no explanation.”

“And yet there should be no combination of events for which the wit of mancannot conceive an explanation. Simply as a mental exercise, without anyassertion that it is true, let me indicate a possible line of thought. Itis, I admit, mere imagination; but how often is imagination the mother oftruth?

“We will suppose that there was a guilty secret, a really shameful secretin the life of this man Douglas. This leads to his murder by someone whois, we will suppose, an avenger, someone from outside. This avenger, forsome reason which I confess I am still at a loss to explain, took the deadman's wedding ring. The vendetta might conceivably date back to the man'sfirst marriage, and the ring be taken for some such reason.

“Before this avenger got away, Barker and the wife had reached the room.The assassin convinced them that any attempt to arrest him would lead tothe publication of some hideous scandal. They were converted to this idea,and preferred to let him go. For this purpose they probably lowered thebridge, which can be done quite noiselessly, and then raised it again. Hemade his escape, and for some reason thought that he could do so moresafely on foot than on the bicycle. He therefore left his machine where itwould not be discovered until he had got safely away. So far we are withinthe bounds of possibility, are we not?”

“Well, it is possible, no doubt,” said I, with some reserve.

“We have to remember, Watson, that whatever occurred is certainlysomething very extraordinary. Well, now, to continue our supposititiouscase, the couple—not necessarily a guilty couple—realize afterthe murderer is gone that they have placed themselves in a position inwhich it may be difficult for them to prove that they did not themselveseither do the deed or connive at it. They rapidly and rather clumsily metthe situation. The mark was put by Barker's bloodstained slipper upon thewindowsill to suggest how the fugitive got away. They obviously were thetwo who must have heard the sound of the gun; so they gave the alarmexactly as they would have done, but a good half hour after the event.”

“And how do you propose to prove all this?”

“Well, if there were an outsider, he may be traced and taken. That wouldbe the most effective of all proofs. But if not—well, the resourcesof science are far from being exhausted. I think that an evening alone inthat study would help me much.”

“An evening alone!”

“I propose to go up there presently. I have arranged it with the estimableAmes, who is by no means wholehearted about Barker. I shall sit in thatroom and see if its atmosphere brings me inspiration. I'm a believer inthe genius loci. You smile, Friend Watson. Well, we shall see. By the way,you have that big umbrella of yours, have you not?”

“It is here.”

“Well, I'll borrow that if I may.”

“Certainly—but what a wretched weapon! If there is danger—”

“Nothing serious, my dear Watson, or I should certainly ask for yourassistance. But I'll take the umbrella. At present I am only awaiting thereturn of our colleagues from Tunbridge Wells, where they are at presentengaged in trying for a likely owner to the bicycle.”

It was nightfall before Inspector MacDonald and White Mason came back fromtheir expedition, and they arrived exultant, reporting a great advance inour investigation.

“Man, I'll admeet that I had my doubts if there was ever an outsider,”said MacDonald, “but that's all past now. We've had the bicycleidentified, and we have a description of our man; so that's a long step onour journey.”

“It sounds to me like the beginning of the end,” said Holmes. “I'm sure Icongratulate you both with all my heart.”

“Well, I started from the fact that Mr. Douglas had seemed disturbed sincethe day before, when he had been at Tunbridge Wells. It was at TunbridgeWells then that he had become conscious of some danger. It was clear,therefore, that if a man had come over with a bicycle it was fromTunbridge Wells that he might be expected to have come. We took thebicycle over with us and showed it at the hotels. It was identified atonce by the manager of the Eagle Commercial as belonging to a man namedHargrave, who had taken a room there two days before. This bicycle and asmall valise were his whole belongings. He had registered his name ascoming from London, but had given no address. The valise was London made,and the contents were British; but the man himself was undoubtedly anAmerican.”

“Well, well,” said Holmes gleefully, “you have indeed done some solid workwhile I have been sitting spinning theories with my friend! It's a lessonin being practical, Mr. Mac.”

“Ay, it's just that, Mr. Holmes,” said the inspector with satisfaction.

“But this may all fit in with your theories,” I remarked.

“That may or may not be. But let us hear the end, Mr. Mac. Was therenothing to identify this man?”

“So little that it was evident that he had carefully guarded himselfagainst identification. There were no papers or letters, and no markingupon the clothes. A cycle map of the county lay on his bedroom table. Hehad left the hotel after breakfast yesterday morning on his bicycle, andno more was heard of him until our inquiries.”

“That's what puzzles me, Mr. Holmes,” said White Mason. “If the fellow didnot want the hue and cry raised over him, one would imagine that he wouldhave returned and remained at the hotel as an inoffensive tourist. As itis, he must know that he will be reported to the police by the hotelmanager and that his disappearance will be connected with the murder.”

“So one would imagine. Still, he has been justified of his wisdom up todate, at any rate, since he has not been taken. But his description—whatof that?”

MacDonald referred to his notebook. “Here we have it so far as they couldgive it. They don't seem to have taken any very particular stock of him;but still the porter, the clerk, and the chambermaid are all agreed thatthis about covers the points. He was a man about five foot nine in height,fifty or so years of age, his hair slightly grizzled, a grayish moustache,a curved nose, and a face which all of them described as fierce andforbidding.”

“Well, bar the expression, that might almost be a description of Douglashimself,” said Holmes. “He is just over fifty, with grizzled hair andmoustache, and about the same height. Did you get anything else?”

“He was dressed in a heavy gray suit with a reefer jacket, and he wore ashort yellow overcoat and a soft cap.”

“What about the shotgun?”

“It is less than two feet long. It could very well have fitted into hisvalise. He could have carried it inside his overcoat without difficulty.”

“And how do you consider that all this bears upon the general case?”

“Well, Mr. Holmes,” said MacDonald, “when we have got our man—andyou may be sure that I had his description on the wires within fiveminutes of hearing it—we shall be better able to judge. But, even asit stands, we have surely gone a long way. We know that an Americancalling himself Hargrave came to Tunbridge Wells two days ago with bicycleand valise. In the latter was a sawed-off shotgun; so he came with thedeliberate purpose of crime. Yesterday morning he set off for this placeon his bicycle, with his gun concealed in his overcoat. No one saw himarrive, so far as we can learn; but he need not pass through the villageto reach the park gates, and there are many cyclists upon the road.Presumably he at once concealed his cycle among the laurels where it wasfound, and possibly lurked there himself, with his eye on the house,waiting for Mr. Douglas to come out. The shotgun is a strange weapon touse inside a house; but he had intended to use it outside, and there ithas very obvious advantages, as it would be impossible to miss with it,and the sound of shots is so common in an English sporting neighbourhoodthat no particular notice would be taken.”

“That is all very clear,” said Holmes.

“Well, Mr. Douglas did not appear. What was he to do next? He left hisbicycle and approached the house in the twilight. He found the bridge downand no one about. He took his chance, intending, no doubt, to make someexcuse if he met anyone. He met no one. He slipped into the first roomthat he saw, and concealed himself behind the curtain. Thence he could seethe drawbridge go up, and he knew that his only escape was through themoat. He waited until quarter-past eleven, when Mr. Douglas upon his usualnightly round came into the room. He shot him and escaped, as arranged. Hewas aware that the bicycle would be described by the hotel people and be aclue against him; so he left it there and made his way by some other meansto London or to some safe hiding place which he had already arranged. Howis that, Mr. Holmes?”

“Well, Mr. Mac, it is very good and very clear so far as it goes. That isyour end of the story. My end is that the crime was committed half an hourearlier than reported; that Mrs. Douglas and Barker are both in aconspiracy to conceal something; that they aided the murderer's escape—orat least that they reached the room before he escaped—and that theyfabricated evidence of his escape through the window, whereas in allprobability they had themselves let him go by lowering the bridge. That'smy reading of the first half.”

The two detectives shook their heads.

“Well, Mr. Holmes, if this is true, we only tumble out of one mystery intoanother,” said the London inspector.

“And in some ways a worse one,” added White Mason. “The lady has neverbeen in America in all her life. What possible connection could she havewith an American assassin which would cause her to shelter him?”

“I freely admit the difficulties,” said Holmes. “I propose to make alittle investigation of my own to-night, and it is just possible that itmay contribute something to the common cause.”

“Can we help you, Mr. Holmes?”

“No, no! Darkness and Dr. Watson's umbrella—my wants are simple. AndAmes, the faithful Ames, no doubt he will stretch a point for me. All mylines of thought lead me back invariably to the one basic question—whyshould an athletic man develop his frame upon so unnatural an instrumentas a single dumb-bell?”

It was late that night when Holmes returned from his solitary excursion.We slept in a double-bedded room, which was the best that the littlecountry inn could do for us. I was already asleep when I was partlyawakened by his entrance.

“Well, Holmes,” I murmured, “have you found anything out?”

He stood beside me in silence, his candle in his hand. Then the tall, leanfigure inclined towards me. “I say, Watson,” he whispered, “would you beafraid to sleep in the same room with a lunatic, a man with softening ofthe brain, an idiot whose mind has lost its grip?”

“Not in the least,” I answered in astonishment.

“Ah, that's lucky,” he said, and not another word would he utter thatnight.

Chapter 7 — The Solution

Next morning, after breakfast, we found Inspector MacDonald and WhiteMason seated in close consultation in the small parlour of the localpolice sergeant. On the table in front of them were piled a number ofletters and telegrams, which they were carefully sorting and docketing.Three had been placed on one side.

“Still on the track of the elusive bicyclist?” Holmes asked cheerfully.“What is the latest news of the ruffian?”

MacDonald pointed ruefully to his heap of correspondence.

“He is at present reported from Leicester, Nottingham, Southampton, Derby,East Ham, Richmond, and fourteen other places. In three of them—EastHam, Leicester, and Liverpool—there is a clear case against him, andhe has actually been arrested. The country seems to be full of thefugitives with yellow coats.”

“Dear me!” said Holmes sympathetically. “Now, Mr. Mac and you, Mr. WhiteMason, I wish to give you a very earnest piece of advice. When I went intothis case with you I bargained, as you will no doubt remember, that Ishould not present you with half-proved theories, but that I should retainand work out my own ideas until I had satisfied myself that they werecorrect. For this reason I am not at the present moment telling you allthat is in my mind. On the other hand, I said that I would play the gamefairly by you, and I do not think it is a fair game to allow you for oneunnecessary moment to waste your energies upon a profitless task.Therefore I am here to advise you this morning, and my advice to you issummed up in three words—abandon the case.”

MacDonald and White Mason stared in amazement at their celebratedcolleague.

“You consider it hopeless!” cried the inspector.

“I consider your case to be hopeless. I do not consider that it ishopeless to arrive at the truth.”

“But this cyclist. He is not an invention. We have his description, hisvalise, his bicycle. The fellow must be somewhere. Why should we not gethim?”

“Yes, yes, no doubt he is somewhere, and no doubt we shall get him; but Iwould not have you waste your energies in East Ham or Liverpool. I am surethat we can find some shorter cut to a result.”

“You are holding something back. It's hardly fair of you, Mr. Holmes.” Theinspector was annoyed.

“You know my methods of work, Mr. Mac. But I will hold it back for theshortest time possible. I only wish to verify my details in one way, whichcan very readily be done, and then I make my bow and return to London,leaving my results entirely at your service. I owe you too much to actotherwise; for in all my experience I cannot recall any more singular andinteresting study.”

“This is clean beyond me, Mr. Holmes. We saw you when we returned fromTunbridge Wells last night, and you were in general agreement with ourresults. What has happened since then to give you a completely new idea ofthe case?”

“Well, since you ask me, I spent, as I told you that I would, some hourslast night at the Manor House.”

“Well, what happened?”

“Ah, I can only give you a very general answer to that for the moment. Bythe way, I have been reading a short but clear and interesting account ofthe old building, purchasable at the modest sum of one penny from thelocal tobacconist.”

Here Holmes drew a small tract, embellished with a rude engraving of theancient Manor House, from his waistcoat pocket.

“It immensely adds to the zest of an investigation, my dear Mr. Mac, whenone is in conscious sympathy with the historical atmosphere of one'ssurroundings. Don't look so impatient; for I assure you that even so baldan account as this raises some sort of picture of the past in one's mind.Permit me to give you a sample. 'Erected in the fifth year of the reign ofJames I, and standing upon the site of a much older building, the ManorHouse of Birlstone presents one of the finest surviving examples of themoated Jacobean residence—'”

“You are making fools of us, Mr. Holmes!”

“Tut, tut, Mr. Mac!—the first sign of temper I have detected in you.Well, I won't read it verbatim, since you feel so strongly upon thesubject. But when I tell you that there is some account of the taking ofthe place by a parliamentary colonel in 1644, of the concealment ofCharles for several days in the course of the Civil War, and finally of avisit there by the second George, you will admit that there are variousassociations of interest connected with this ancient house.”

“I don't doubt it, Mr. Holmes; but that is no business of ours.”

“Is it not? Is it not? Breadth of view, my dear Mr. Mac, is one of theessentials of our profession. The interplay of ideas and the oblique usesof knowledge are often of extraordinary interest. You will excuse theseremarks from one who, though a mere connoisseur of crime, is still ratherolder and perhaps more experienced than yourself.”

“I'm the first to admit that,” said the detective heartily. “You get toyour point, I admit; but you have such a deuced round-the-corner way ofdoing it.”

“Well, well, I'll drop past history and get down to present-day facts. Icalled last night, as I have already said, at the Manor House. I did notsee either Barker or Mrs. Douglas. I saw no necessity to disturb them; butI was pleased to hear that the lady was not visibly pining and that shehad partaken of an excellent dinner. My visit was specially made to thegood Mr. Ames, with whom I exchanged some amiabilities, which culminatedin his allowing me, without reference to anyone else, to sit alone for atime in the study.”

“What! With that?” I ejaculated.

“No, no, everything is now in order. You gave permission for that, Mr.Mac, as I am informed. The room was in its normal state, and in it Ipassed an instructive quarter of an hour.”

“What were you doing?”

“Well, not to make a mystery of so simple a matter, I was looking for themissing dumb-bell. It has always bulked rather large in my estimate of thecase. I ended by finding it.”

“Where?”

“Ah, there we come to the edge of the unexplored. Let me go a littlefurther, a very little further, and I will promise that you shall shareeverything that I know.”

“Well, we're bound to take you on your own terms,” said the inspector;“but when it comes to telling us to abandon the case—why in the nameof goodness should we abandon the case?”

“For the simple reason, my dear Mr. Mac, that you have not got the firstidea what it is that you are investigating.”

“We are investigating the murder of Mr. John Douglas of Birlstone Manor.”

“Yes, yes, so you are. But don't trouble to trace the mysterious gentlemanupon the bicycle. I assure you that it won't help you.”

“Then what do you suggest that we do?”

“I will tell you exactly what to do, if you will do it.”

“Well, I'm bound to say I've always found you had reason behind all yourqueer ways. I'll do what you advise.”

“And you, Mr. White Mason?”

The country detective looked helplessly from one to the other. Holmes andhis methods were new to him. “Well, if it is good enough for theinspector, it is good enough for me,” he said at last.

“Capital!” said Holmes. “Well, then, I should recommend a nice, cheerycountry walk for both of you. They tell me that the views from BirlstoneRidge over the Weald are very remarkable. No doubt lunch could be got atsome suitable hostelry; though my ignorance of the country prevents mefrom recommending one. In the evening, tired but happy—”

“Man, this is getting past a joke!” cried MacDonald, rising angrily fromhis chair.

“Well, well, spend the day as you like,” said Holmes, patting himcheerfully upon the shoulder. “Do what you like and go where you will, butmeet me here before dusk without fail—without fail, Mr. Mac.”

“That sounds more like sanity.”

“All of it was excellent advice; but I don't insist, so long as you arehere when I need you. But now, before we part, I want you to write a noteto Mr. Barker.”

“Well?”

“I'll dictate it, if you like. Ready?

“Dear Sir:

“It has struck me that it is our duty to drain the moat, in the hope thatwe may find some—”

“It's impossible,” said the inspector. “I've made inquiry.”

“Tut, tut! My dear sir, please do what I ask you.”

“Well, go on.”

“—in the hope that we may find something which may bear upon ourinvestigation. I have made arrangements, and the workmen will be at workearly to-morrow morning diverting the stream—”

“Impossible!”

“—diverting the stream; so I thought it best to explain mattersbeforehand.

“Now sign that, and send it by hand about four o'clock. At that hour weshall meet again in this room. Until then we may each do what we like; forI can assure you that this inquiry has come to a definite pause.”

Evening was drawing in when we reassembled. Holmes was very serious in hismanner, myself curious, and the detectives obviously critical and annoyed.

“Well, gentlemen,” said my friend gravely, “I am asking you now to puteverything to the test with me, and you will judge for yourselves whetherthe observations I have made justify the conclusions to which I have come.It is a chill evening, and I do not know how long our expedition may last;so I beg that you will wear your warmest coats. It is of the firstimportance that we should be in our places before it grows dark; so withyour permission we shall get started at once.”

We passed along the outer bounds of the Manor House park until we came toa place where there was a gap in the rails which fenced it. Through thiswe slipped, and then in the gathering gloom we followed Holmes until wehad reached a shrubbery which lies nearly opposite to the main door andthe drawbridge. The latter had not been raised. Holmes crouched downbehind the screen of laurels, and we all three followed his example.

“Well, what are we to do now?” asked MacDonald with some gruffness.

“Possess our souls in patience and make as little noise as possible,”Holmes answered.

“What are we here for at all? I really think that you might treat us withmore frankness.”

Holmes laughed. “Watson insists that I am the dramatist in real life,”said he. “Some touch of the artist wells up within me, and callsinsistently for a well-staged performance. Surely our profession, Mr. Mac,would be a drab and sordid one if we did not sometimes set the scene so asto glorify our results. The blunt accusation, the brutal tap upon theshoulder—what can one make of such a denouement? But the quickinference, the subtle trap, the clever forecast of coming events, thetriumphant vindication of bold theories—are these not the pride andthe justification of our life's work? At the present moment you thrillwith the glamour of the situation and the anticipation of the hunt. Wherewould be that thrill if I had been as definite as a timetable? I only aska little patience, Mr. Mac, and all will be clear to you.”

“Well, I hope the pride and justification and the rest of it will comebefore we all get our death of cold,” said the London detective with comicresignation.

We all had good reason to join in the aspiration; for our vigil was a longand bitter one. Slowly the shadows darkened over the long, sombre face ofthe old house. A cold, damp reek from the moat chilled us to the bones andset our teeth chattering. There was a single lamp over the gateway and asteady globe of light in the fatal study. Everything else was dark andstill.

“How long is this to last?” asked the inspector finally. “And what is itwe are watching for?”

“I have no more notion than you how long it is to last,” Holmes answeredwith some asperity. “If criminals would always schedule their movementslike railway trains, it would certainly be more convenient for all of us.As to what it is we—Well, THAT'S what we are watching for!”

As he spoke the bright, yellow light in the study was obscured by somebodypassing to and fro before it. The laurels among which we lay wereimmediately opposite the window and not more than a hundred feet from it.Presently it was thrown open with a whining of hinges, and we could dimlysee the dark outline of a man's head and shoulders looking out into thegloom. For some minutes he peered forth in furtive, stealthy fashion, asone who wishes to be assured that he is unobserved. Then he leanedforward, and in the intense silence we were aware of the soft lapping ofagitated water. He seemed to be stirring up the moat with something whichhe held in his hand. Then suddenly he hauled something in as a fishermanlands a fish—some large, round object which obscured the light as itwas dragged through the open casement.

“Now!” cried Holmes. “Now!”

We were all upon our feet, staggering after him with our stiffened limbs,while he ran swiftly across the bridge and rang violently at the bell.There was the rasping of bolts from the other side, and the amazed Amesstood in the entrance. Holmes brushed him aside without a word and,followed by all of us, rushed into the room which had been occupied by theman whom we had been watching.

The oil lamp on the table represented the glow which we had seen fromoutside. It was now in the hand of Cecil Barker, who held it towards us aswe entered. Its light shone upon his strong, resolute, clean-shaved faceand his menacing eyes.

“What the devil is the meaning of all this?” he cried. “What are youafter, anyhow?”

Holmes took a swift glance round, and then pounced upon a sodden bundletied together with cord which lay where it had been thrust under thewriting table.

“This is what we are after, Mr. Barker—this bundle, weighted with adumb-bell, which you have just raised from the bottom of the moat.”

Barker stared at Holmes with amazement in his face. “How in thunder cameyou to know anything about it?” he asked.

“Simply that I put it there.”

“You put it there! You!”

“Perhaps I should have said 'replaced it there,'” said Holmes. “You willremember, Inspector MacDonald, that I was somewhat struck by the absenceof a dumb-bell. I drew your attention to it; but with the pressure ofother events you had hardly the time to give it the consideration whichwould have enabled you to draw deductions from it. When water is near anda weight is missing it is not a very far-fetched supposition thatsomething has been sunk in the water. The idea was at least worth testing;so with the help of Ames, who admitted me to the room, and the crook ofDr. Watson's umbrella, I was able last night to fish up and inspect thisbundle.

“It was of the first importance, however, that we should be able to provewho placed it there. This we accomplished by the very obvious device ofannouncing that the moat would be dried to-morrow, which had, of course,the effect that whoever had hidden the bundle would most certainlywithdraw it the moment that darkness enabled him to do so. We have no lessthan four witnesses as to who it was who took advantage of theopportunity, and so, Mr. Barker, I think the word lies now with you.”

Sherlock Holmes put the sopping bundle upon the table beside the lamp andundid the cord which bound it. From within he extracted a dumb-bell, whichhe tossed down to its fellow in the corner. Next he drew forth a pair ofboots. “American, as you perceive,” he remarked, pointing to the toes.Then he laid upon the table a long, deadly, sheathed knife. Finally heunravelled a bundle of clothing, comprising a complete set ofunderclothes, socks, a gray tweed suit, and a short yellow overcoat.

“The clothes are commonplace,” remarked Holmes, “save only the overcoat,which is full of suggestive touches.” He held it tenderly towards thelight. “Here, as you perceive, is the inner pocket prolonged into thelining in such fashion as to give ample space for the truncated fowlingpiece. The tailor's tab is on the neck—'Neal, Outfitter, Vermissa,U.S.A.' I have spent an instructive afternoon in the rector's library, andhave enlarged my knowledge by adding the fact that Vermissa is aflourishing little town at the head of one of the best known coal and ironvalleys in the United States. I have some recollection, Mr. Barker, thatyou associated the coal districts with Mr. Douglas's first wife, and itwould surely not be too far-fetched an inference that the V.V. upon thecard by the dead body might stand for Vermissa Valley, or that this veryvalley which sends forth emissaries of murder may be that Valley of Fearof which we have heard. So much is fairly clear. And now, Mr. Barker, Iseem to be standing rather in the way of your explanation.”

It was a sight to see Cecil Barker's expressive face during thisexposition of the great detective. Anger, amazement, consternation, andindecision swept over it in turn. Finally he took refuge in a somewhatacrid irony.

“You know such a lot, Mr. Holmes, perhaps you had better tell us somemore,” he sneered.

“I have no doubt that I could tell you a great deal more, Mr. Barker; butit would come with a better grace from you.”

“Oh, you think so, do you? Well, all I can say is that if there's anysecret here it is not my secret, and I am not the man to give it away.”

“Well, if you take that line, Mr. Barker,” said the inspector quietly, “wemust just keep you in sight until we have the warrant and can hold you.”

“You can do what you damn please about that,” said Barker defiantly.

The proceedings seemed to have come to a definite end so far as he wasconcerned; for one had only to look at that granite face to realize thatno peine forte et dure would ever force him to plead against his will. Thedeadlock was broken, however, by a woman's voice. Mrs. Douglas had beenstanding listening at the half opened door, and now she entered the room.

“You have done enough for now, Cecil,” said she. “Whatever comes of it inthe future, you have done enough.”

“Enough and more than enough,” remarked Sherlock Holmes gravely. “I haveevery sympathy with you, madam, and should strongly urge you to have someconfidence in the common sense of our jurisdiction and to take the policevoluntarily into your complete confidence. It may be that I am myself atfault for not following up the hint which you conveyed to me through myfriend, Dr. Watson; but, at that time I had every reason to believe thatyou were directly concerned in the crime. Now I am assured that this isnot so. At the same time, there is much that is unexplained, and I shouldstrongly recommend that you ask Mr. Douglas to tell us his own story.”

Mrs. Douglas gave a cry of astonishment at Holmes's words. The detectivesand I must have echoed it, when we were aware of a man who seemed to haveemerged from the wall, who advanced now from the gloom of the corner inwhich he had appeared. Mrs. Douglas turned, and in an instant her armswere round him. Barker had seized his outstretched hand.

“It's best this way, Jack,” his wife repeated; “I am sure that it isbest.”

“Indeed, yes, Mr. Douglas,” said Sherlock Holmes, “I am sure that you willfind it best.”

The man stood blinking at us with the dazed look of one who comes from thedark into the light. It was a remarkable face, bold gray eyes, a strong,short-clipped, grizzled moustache, a square, projecting chin, and ahumorous mouth. He took a good look at us all, and then to my amazement headvanced to me and handed me a bundle of paper.

“I've heard of you,” said he in a voice which was not quite English andnot quite American, but was altogether mellow and pleasing. “You are thehistorian of this bunch. Well, Dr. Watson, you've never had such a storyas that pass through your hands before, and I'll lay my last dollar onthat. Tell it your own way; but there are the facts, and you can't missthe public so long as you have those. I've been cooped up two days, andI've spent the daylight hours—as much daylight as I could get inthat rat trap—in putting the thing into words. You're welcome tothem—you and your public. There's the story of the Valley of Fear.”

“That's the past, Mr. Douglas,” said Sherlock Holmes quietly. “What wedesire now is to hear your story of the present.”

“You'll have it, sir,” said Douglas. “May I smoke as I talk? Well, thankyou, Mr. Holmes. You're a smoker yourself, if I remember right, and you'llguess what it is to be sitting for two days with tobacco in your pocketand afraid that the smell will give you away.” He leaned against themantelpiece and sucked at the cigar which Holmes had handed him. “I'veheard of you, Mr. Holmes. I never guessed that I should meet you. Butbefore you are through with that,” he nodded at my papers, “you will sayI've brought you something fresh.”

Inspector MacDonald had been staring at the newcomer with the greatestamazement. “Well, this fairly beats me!” he cried at last. “If you are Mr.John Douglas of Birlstone Manor, then whose death have we beeninvestigating for these two days, and where in the world have you sprungfrom now? You seemed to me to come out of the floor like a jack-in-a-box.”

“Ah, Mr. Mac,” said Holmes, shaking a reproving forefinger, “you would notread that excellent local compilation which described the concealment ofKing Charles. People did not hide in those days without excellent hidingplaces, and the hiding place that has once been used may be again. I hadpersuaded myself that we should find Mr. Douglas under this roof.”

“And how long have you been playing this trick upon us, Mr. Holmes?” saidthe inspector angrily. “How long have you allowed us to waste ourselvesupon a search that you knew to be an absurd one?”

“Not one instant, my dear Mr. Mac. Only last night did I form my views ofthe case. As they could not be put to the proof until this evening, Iinvited you and your colleague to take a holiday for the day. Pray whatmore could I do? When I found the suit of clothes in the moat, it at oncebecame apparent to me that the body we had found could not have been thebody of Mr. John Douglas at all, but must be that of the bicyclist fromTunbridge Wells. No other conclusion was possible. Therefore I had todetermine where Mr. John Douglas himself could be, and the balance ofprobability was that with the connivance of his wife and his friend he wasconcealed in a house which had such conveniences for a fugitive, andawaiting quieter times when he could make his final escape.”

“Well, you figured it out about right,” said Douglas approvingly. “Ithought I'd dodge your British law; for I was not sure how I stood underit, and also I saw my chance to throw these hounds once for all off mytrack. Mind you, from first to last I have done nothing to be ashamed of,and nothing that I would not do again; but you'll judge that foryourselves when I tell you my story. Never mind warning me, Inspector: I'mready to stand pat upon the truth.

“I'm not going to begin at the beginning. That's all there,” he indicatedmy bundle of papers, “and a mighty queer yarn you'll find it. It all comesdown to this: That there are some men that have good cause to hate me andwould give their last dollar to know that they had got me. So long as I amalive and they are alive, there is no safety in this world for me. Theyhunted me from Chicago to California, then they chased me out of America;but when I married and settled down in this quiet spot I thought my lastyears were going to be peaceable.

“I never explained to my wife how things were. Why should I pull her intoit? She would never have a quiet moment again; but would always beimagining trouble. I fancy she knew something, for I may have dropped aword here or a word there; but until yesterday, after you gentlemen hadseen her, she never knew the rights of the matter. She told you all sheknew, and so did Barker here; for on the night when this thing happenedthere was mighty little time for explanations. She knows everything now,and I would have been a wiser man if I had told her sooner. But it was ahard question, dear,” he took her hand for an instant in his own, “and Iacted for the best.

“Well, gentlemen, the day before these happenings I was over in TunbridgeWells, and I got a glimpse of a man in the street. It was only a glimpse;but I have a quick eye for these things, and I never doubted who it was.It was the worst enemy I had among them all—one who has been afterme like a hungry wolf after a caribou all these years. I knew there wastrouble coming, and I came home and made ready for it. I guessed I'd fightthrough it all right on my own, my luck was a proverb in the States about'76. I never doubted that it would be with me still.

“I was on my guard all that next day, and never went out into the park.It's as well, or he'd have had the drop on me with that buckshot gun ofhis before ever I could draw on him. After the bridge was up—my mindwas always more restful when that bridge was up in the evenings—Iput the thing clear out of my head. I never dreamed of his getting intothe house and waiting for me. But when I made my round in my dressinggown, as was my habit, I had no sooner entered the study than I scenteddanger. I guess when a man has had dangers in his life—and I've hadmore than most in my time—there is a kind of sixth sense that wavesthe red flag. I saw the signal clear enough, and yet I couldn't tell youwhy. Next instant I spotted a boot under the window curtain, and then Isaw why plain enough.

“I'd just the one candle that was in my hand; but there was a good lightfrom the hall lamp through the open door. I put down the candle and jumpedfor a hammer that I'd left on the mantel. At the same moment he sprang atme. I saw the glint of a knife, and I lashed at him with the hammer. I gothim somewhere; for the knife tinkled down on the floor. He dodged roundthe table as quick as an eel, and a moment later he'd got his gun fromunder his coat. I heard him cock it; but I had got hold of it before hecould fire. I had it by the barrel, and we wrestled for it all ends up fora minute or more. It was death to the man that lost his grip.

“He never lost his grip; but he got it butt downward for a moment toolong. Maybe it was I that pulled the trigger. Maybe we just jolted it offbetween us. Anyhow, he got both barrels in the face, and there I was,staring down at all that was left of Ted Baldwin. I'd recognized him inthe township, and again when he sprang for me; but his own mother wouldn'trecognize him as I saw him then. I'm used to rough work; but I fairlyturned sick at the sight of him.

“I was hanging on the side of the table when Barker came hurrying down. Iheard my wife coming, and I ran to the door and stopped her. It was nosight for a woman. I promised I'd come to her soon. I said a word or twoto Barker—he took it all in at a glance—and we waited for therest to come along. But there was no sign of them. Then we understood thatthey could hear nothing, and that all that had happened was known only toourselves.

“It was at that instant that the idea came to me. I was fairly dazzled bythe brilliance of it. The man's sleeve had slipped up and there was thebranded mark of the lodge upon his forearm. See here!”

The man whom we had known as Douglas turned up his own coat and cuff toshow a brown triangle within a circle exactly like that which we had seenupon the dead man.

“It was the sight of that which started me on it. I seemed to see it allclear at a glance. There were his height and hair and figure, about thesame as my own. No one could swear to his face, poor devil! I brought downthis suit of clothes, and in a quarter of an hour Barker and I had put mydressing gown on him and he lay as you found him. We tied all his thingsinto a bundle, and I weighted them with the only weight I could find andput them through the window. The card he had meant to lay upon my body waslying beside his own.

“My rings were put on his finger; but when it came to the wedding ring,”he held out his muscular hand, “you can see for yourselves that I hadstruck the limit. I have not moved it since the day I was married, and itwould have taken a file to get it off. I don't know, anyhow, that I shouldhave cared to part with it; but if I had wanted to I couldn't. So we justhad to leave that detail to take care of itself. On the other hand, Ibrought a bit of plaster down and put it where I am wearing one myself atthis instant. You slipped up there, Mr. Holmes, clever as you are; for ifyou had chanced to take off that plaster you would have found no cutunderneath it.

“Well, that was the situation. If I could lie low for a while and then getaway where I could be joined by my 'widow' we should have a chance at lastof living in peace for the rest of our lives. These devils would give meno rest so long as I was above ground; but if they saw in the papers thatBaldwin had got his man, there would be an end of all my troubles. Ihadn't much time to make it all clear to Barker and to my wife; but theyunderstood enough to be able to help me. I knew all about this hidingplace, so did Ames; but it never entered his head to connect it with thematter. I retired into it, and it was up to Barker to do the rest.

“I guess you can fill in for yourselves what he did. He opened the windowand made the mark on the sill to give an idea of how the murderer escaped.It was a tall order, that; but as the bridge was up there was no otherway. Then, when everything was fixed, he rang the bell for all he wasworth. What happened afterward you know. And so, gentlemen, you can dowhat you please; but I've told you the truth and the whole truth, so helpme God! What I ask you now is how do I stand by the English law?”

There was a silence which was broken by Sherlock Holmes.

“The English law is in the main a just law. You will get no worse thanyour deserts from that, Mr. Douglas. But I would ask you how did this manknow that you lived here, or how to get into your house, or where to hideto get you?”

“I know nothing of this.”

Holmes's face was very white and grave. “The story is not over yet, Ifear,” said he. “You may find worse dangers than the English law, or eventhan your enemies from America. I see trouble before you, Mr. Douglas.You'll take my advice and still be on your guard.”

And now, my long-suffering readers, I will ask you to come away with mefor a time, far from the Sussex Manor House of Birlstone, and far alsofrom the year of grace in which we made our eventful journey which endedwith the strange story of the man who had been known as John Douglas. Iwish you to journey back some twenty years in time, and westward somethousands of miles in space, that I may lay before you a singular andterrible narrative—so singular and so terrible that you may find ithard to believe that even as I tell it, even so did it occur.

Do not think that I intrude one story before another is finished. As youread on you will find that this is not so. And when I have detailed thosedistant events and you have solved this mystery of the past, we shall meetonce more in those rooms on Baker Street, where this, like so many otherwonderful happenings, will find its end.

PART 2 — The Scowrers

Chapter 1 — The Man

It was the fourth of February in the year 1875. It had been a severewinter, and the snow lay deep in the gorges of the Gilmerton Mountains.The steam ploughs had, however, kept the railroad open, and the eveningtrain which connects the long line of coal-mining and iron-workingsettlements was slowly groaning its way up the steep gradients which leadfrom Stagville on the plain to Vermissa, the central township which liesat the head of Vermissa Valley. From this point the track sweeps downwardto Bartons Crossing, Helmdale, and the purely agricultural county ofMerton. It was a single track railroad; but at every siding—and theywere numerous—long lines of trucks piled with coal and iron ore toldof the hidden wealth which had brought a rude population and a bustlinglife to this most desolate corner of the United States of America.

For desolate it was! Little could the first pioneer who had traversed ithave ever imagined that the fairest prairies and the most lush waterpastures were valueless compared to this gloomy land of black crag andtangled forest. Above the dark and often scarcely penetrable woods upontheir flanks, the high, bare crowns of the mountains, white snow, andjagged rock towered upon each flank, leaving a long, winding, tortuousvalley in the centre. Up this the little train was slowly crawling.

The oil lamps had just been lit in the leading passenger car, a long, barecarriage in which some twenty or thirty people were seated. The greaternumber of these were workmen returning from their day's toil in the lowerpart of the valley. At least a dozen, by their grimed faces and the safetylanterns which they carried, proclaimed themselves miners. These satsmoking in a group and conversed in low voices, glancing occasionally attwo men on the opposite side of the car, whose uniforms and badges showedthem to be policemen.

Several women of the labouring class and one or two travellers who mighthave been small local storekeepers made up the rest of the company, withthe exception of one young man in a corner by himself. It is with this manthat we are concerned. Take a good look at him; for he is worth it.

He is a fresh-complexioned, middle-sized young man, not far, one wouldguess, from his thirtieth year. He has large, shrewd, humorous gray eyeswhich twinkle inquiringly from time to time as he looks round through hisspectacles at the people about him. It is easy to see that he is of asociable and possibly simple disposition, anxious to be friendly to allmen. Anyone could pick him at once as gregarious in his habits andcommunicative in his nature, with a quick wit and a ready smile. And yetthe man who studied him more closely might discern a certain firmness ofjaw and grim tightness about the lips which would warn him that there weredepths beyond, and that this pleasant, brown-haired young Irishman mightconceivably leave his mark for good or evil upon any society to which hewas introduced.

Having made one or two tentative remarks to the nearest miner, andreceiving only short, gruff replies, the traveller resigned himself touncongenial silence, staring moodily out of the window at the fadinglandscape.

It was not a cheering prospect. Through the growing gloom there pulsed thered glow of the furnaces on the sides of the hills. Great heaps of slagand dumps of cinders loomed up on each side, with the high shafts of thecollieries towering above them. Huddled groups of mean, wooden houses, thewindows of which were beginning to outline themselves in light, werescattered here and there along the line, and the frequent halting placeswere crowded with their swarthy inhabitants.

The iron and coal valleys of the Vermissa district were no resorts for theleisured or the cultured. Everywhere there were stern signs of the crudestbattle of life, the rude work to be done, and the rude, strong workers whodid it.

The young traveller gazed out into this dismal country with a face ofmingled repulsion and interest, which showed that the scene was new tohim. At intervals he drew from his pocket a bulky letter to which hereferred, and on the margins of which he scribbled some notes. Once fromthe back of his waist he produced something which one would hardly haveexpected to find in the possession of so mild-mannered a man. It was anavy revolver of the largest size. As he turned it slantwise to the light,the glint upon the rims of the copper shells within the drum showed thatit was fully loaded. He quickly restored it to his secret pocket, but notbefore it had been observed by a working man who had seated himself uponthe adjoining bench.

“Hullo, mate!” said he. “You seem heeled and ready.”

The young man smiled with an air of embarrassment.

“Yes,” said he, “we need them sometimes in the place I come from.”

“And where may that be?”

“I'm last from Chicago.”

“A stranger in these parts?”

“Yes.”

“You may find you need it here,” said the workman.

“Ah! is that so?” The young man seemed interested.

“Have you heard nothing of doings hereabouts?”

“Nothing out of the way.”

“Why, I thought the country was full of it. You'll hear quick enough. Whatmade you come here?”

“I heard there was always work for a willing man.”

“Are you a member of the union?”

“Sure.”

“Then you'll get your job, I guess. Have you any friends?”

“Not yet; but I have the means of making them.”

“How's that, then?”

“I am one of the Eminent Order of Freemen. There's no town without alodge, and where there is a lodge I'll find my friends.”

The remark had a singular effect upon his companion. He glanced roundsuspiciously at the others in the car. The miners were still whisperingamong themselves. The two police officers were dozing. He came across,seated himself close to the young traveller, and held out his hand.

“Put it there,” he said.

A hand-grip passed between the two.

“I see you speak the truth,” said the workman. “But it's well to makecertain.” He raised his right hand to his right eyebrow. The traveller atonce raised his left hand to his left eyebrow.

“Dark nights are unpleasant,” said the workman.

“Yes, for strangers to travel,” the other answered.

“That's good enough. I'm Brother Scanlan, Lodge 341, Vermissa Valley. Gladto see you in these parts.”

“Thank you. I'm Brother John McMurdo, Lodge 29, Chicago. Bodymaster J.H.Scott. But I am in luck to meet a brother so early.”

“Well, there are plenty of us about. You won't find the order moreflourishing anywhere in the States than right here in Vermissa Valley. Butwe could do with some lads like you. I can't understand a spry man of theunion finding no work to do in Chicago.”

“I found plenty of work to do,” said McMurdo.

“Then why did you leave?”

McMurdo nodded towards the policemen and smiled. “I guess those chapswould be glad to know,” he said.

Scanlan groaned sympathetically. “In trouble?” he asked in a whisper.

“Deep.”

“A penitentiary job?”

“And the rest.”

“Not a killing!”

“It's early days to talk of such things,” said McMurdo with the air of aman who had been surprised into saying more than he intended. “I've my owngood reasons for leaving Chicago, and let that be enough for you. Who areyou that you should take it on yourself to ask such things?” His gray eyesgleamed with sudden and dangerous anger from behind his glasses.

“All right, mate, no offense meant. The boys will think none the worse ofyou, whatever you may have done. Where are you bound for now?”

“Vermissa.”

“That's the third halt down the line. Where are you staying?”

McMurdo took out an envelope and held it close to the murky oil lamp.“Here is the address—Jacob Shafter, Sheridan Street. It's a boardinghouse that was recommended by a man I knew in Chicago.”

“Well, I don't know it; but Vermissa is out of my beat. I live at Hobson'sPatch, and that's here where we are drawing up. But, say, there's one bitof advice I'll give you before we part: If you're in trouble in Vermissa,go straight to the Union House and see Boss McGinty. He is the Bodymasterof Vermissa Lodge, and nothing can happen in these parts unless Black JackMcGinty wants it. So long, mate! Maybe we'll meet in lodge one of theseevenings. But mind my words: If you are in trouble, go to Boss McGinty.”

Scanlan descended, and McMurdo was left once again to his thoughts. Nighthad now fallen, and the flames of the frequent furnaces were roaring andleaping in the darkness. Against their lurid background dark figures werebending and straining, twisting and turning, with the motion of winch orof windlass, to the rhythm of an eternal clank and roar.

“I guess hell must look something like that,” said a voice.

McMurdo turned and saw that one of the policemen had shifted in his seatand was staring out into the fiery waste.

“For that matter,” said the other policeman, “I allow that hell must BEsomething like that. If there are worse devils down yonder than some wecould name, it's more than I'd expect. I guess you are new to this part,young man?”

“Well, what if I am?” McMurdo answered in a surly voice.

“Just this, mister, that I should advise you to be careful in choosingyour friends. I don't think I'd begin with Mike Scanlan or his gang if Iwere you.”

“What the hell is it to you who are my friends?” roared McMurdo in a voicewhich brought every head in the carriage round to witness the altercation.“Did I ask you for your advice, or did you think me such a sucker that Icouldn't move without it? You speak when you are spoken to, and by theLord you'd have to wait a long time if it was me!” He thrust out his faceand grinned at the patrolmen like a snarling dog.

The two policemen, heavy, good-natured men, were taken aback by theextraordinary vehemence with which their friendly advances had beenrejected.

“No offense, stranger,” said one. “It was a warning for your own good,seeing that you are, by your own showing, new to the place.”

“I'm new to the place; but I'm not new to you and your kind!” criedMcMurdo in cold fury. “I guess you're the same in all places, shoving youradvice in when nobody asks for it.”

“Maybe we'll see more of you before very long,” said one of the patrolmenwith a grin. “You're a real hand-picked one, if I am a judge.”

“I was thinking the same,” remarked the other. “I guess we may meetagain.”

“I'm not afraid of you, and don't you think it!” cried McMurdo. “My name'sJack McMurdo—see? If you want me, you'll find me at Jacob Shafter'son Sheridan Street, Vermissa; so I'm not hiding from you, am I? Day ornight I dare to look the like of you in the face—don't make anymistake about that!”

There was a murmur of sympathy and admiration from the miners at thedauntless demeanour of the newcomer, while the two policemen shruggedtheir shoulders and renewed a conversation between themselves.

A few minutes later the train ran into the ill-lit station, and there wasa general clearing; for Vermissa was by far the largest town on the line.McMurdo picked up his leather gripsack and was about to start off into thedarkness, when one of the miners accosted him.

“By Gar, mate! you know how to speak to the cops,” he said in a voice ofawe. “It was grand to hear you. Let me carry your grip and show you theroad. I'm passing Shafter's on the way to my own shack.”

There was a chorus of friendly “Good-nights” from the other miners as theypassed from the platform. Before ever he had set foot in it, McMurdo theturbulent had become a character in Vermissa.

The country had been a place of terror; but the town was in its way evenmore depressing. Down that long valley there was at least a certain gloomygrandeur in the huge fires and the clouds of drifting smoke, while thestrength and industry of man found fitting monuments in the hills which hehad spilled by the side of his monstrous excavations. But the town showeda dead level of mean ugliness and squalor. The broad street was churned upby the traffic into a horrible rutted paste of muddy snow. The sidewalkswere narrow and uneven. The numerous gas-lamps served only to show moreclearly a long line of wooden houses, each with its veranda facing thestreet, unkempt and dirty.

As they approached the centre of the town the scene was brightened by arow of well-lit stores, and even more by a cluster of saloons and gaminghouses, in which the miners spent their hard-earned but generous wages.

“That's the Union House,” said the guide, pointing to one saloon whichrose almost to the dignity of being a hotel. “Jack McGinty is the bossthere.”

“What sort of a man is he?” McMurdo asked.

“What! have you never heard of the boss?”

“How could I have heard of him when you know that I am a stranger in theseparts?”

“Well, I thought his name was known clear across the country. It's been inthe papers often enough.”

“What for?”

“Well,” the miner lowered his voice—“over the affairs.”

“What affairs?”

“Good Lord, mister! you are queer, if I must say it without offense.There's only one set of affairs that you'll hear of in these parts, andthat's the affairs of the Scowrers.”

“Why, I seem to have read of the Scowrers in Chicago. A gang of murderers,are they not?”

“Hush, on your life!” cried the miner, standing still in alarm, and gazingin amazement at his companion. “Man, you won't live long in these parts ifyou speak in the open street like that. Many a man has had the life beatenout of him for less.”

“Well, I know nothing about them. It's only what I have read.”

“And I'm not saying that you have not read the truth.” The man lookednervously round him as he spoke, peering into the shadows as if he fearedto see some lurking danger. “If killing is murder, then God knows there ismurder and to spare. But don't you dare to breathe the name of JackMcGinty in connection with it, stranger; for every whisper goes back tohim, and he is not one that is likely to let it pass. Now, that's thehouse you're after, that one standing back from the street. You'll findold Jacob Shafter that runs it as honest a man as lives in this township.”

“I thank you,” said McMurdo, and shaking hands with his new acquaintancehe plodded, gripsack in hand, up the path which led to the dwelling house,at the door of which he gave a resounding knock.

It was opened at once by someone very different from what he had expected.It was a woman, young and singularly beautiful. She was of the Germantype, blonde and fair-haired, with the piquant contrast of a pair ofbeautiful dark eyes with which she surveyed the stranger with surprise anda pleasing embarrassment which brought a wave of colour over her paleface. Framed in the bright light of the open doorway, it seemed to McMurdothat he had never seen a more beautiful picture; the more attractive forits contrast with the sordid and gloomy surroundings. A lovely violetgrowing upon one of those black slag-heaps of the mines would not haveseemed more surprising. So entranced was he that he stood staring withouta word, and it was she who broke the silence.

“I thought it was father,” said she with a pleasing little touch of aGerman accent. “Did you come to see him? He is down town. I expect himback every minute.”

McMurdo continued to gaze at her in open admiration until her eyes droppedin confusion before this masterful visitor.

“No, miss,” he said at last, “I'm in no hurry to see him. But your housewas recommended to me for board. I thought it might suit me—and nowI know it will.”

“You are quick to make up your mind,” said she with a smile.

“Anyone but a blind man could do as much,” the other answered.

She laughed at the compliment. “Come right in, sir,” she said. “I'm MissEttie Shafter, Mr. Shafter's daughter. My mother's dead, and I run thehouse. You can sit down by the stove in the front room until father comesalong—Ah, here he is! So you can fix things with him right away.”

A heavy, elderly man came plodding up the path. In a few words McMurdoexplained his business. A man of the name of Murphy had given him theaddress in Chicago. He in turn had had it from someone else. Old Shafterwas quite ready. The stranger made no bones about terms, agreed at once toevery condition, and was apparently fairly flush of money. For sevendollars a week paid in advance he was to have board and lodging.

So it was that McMurdo, the self-confessed fugitive from justice, took uphis abode under the roof of the Shafters, the first step which was to leadto so long and dark a train of events, ending in a far distant land.

Chapter 2 — The Bodymaster

McMurdo was a man who made his mark quickly. Wherever he was the folkaround soon knew it. Within a week he had become infinitely the mostimportant person at Shafter's. There were ten or a dozen boarders there;but they were honest foremen or commonplace clerks from the stores, of avery different calibre from the young Irishman. Of an evening when theygathered together his joke was always the readiest, his conversation thebrightest, and his song the best. He was a born boon companion, with amagnetism which drew good humour from all around him.

And yet he showed again and again, as he had shown in the railwaycarriage, a capacity for sudden, fierce anger, which compelled the respectand even the fear of those who met him. For the law, too, and all who wereconnected with it, he exhibited a bitter contempt which delighted some andalarmed others of his fellow boarders.

From the first he made it evident, by his open admiration, that thedaughter of the house had won his heart from the instant that he had seteyes upon her beauty and her grace. He was no backward suitor. On thesecond day he told her that he loved her, and from then onward he repeatedthe same story with an absolute disregard of what she might say todiscourage him.

“Someone else?” he would cry. “Well, the worse luck for someone else! Lethim look out for himself! Am I to lose my life's chance and all my heart'sdesire for someone else? You can keep on saying no, Ettie: the day willcome when you will say yes, and I'm young enough to wait.”

He was a dangerous suitor, with his glib Irish tongue, and his pretty,coaxing ways. There was about him also that glamour of experience and ofmystery which attracts a woman's interest, and finally her love. He couldtalk of the sweet valleys of County Monaghan from which he came, of thelovely, distant island, the low hills and green meadows of which seemedthe more beautiful when imagination viewed them from this place of grimeand snow.

Then he was versed in the life of the cities of the North, of Detroit, andthe lumber camps of Michigan, and finally of Chicago, where he had workedin a planing mill. And afterwards came the hint of romance, the feelingthat strange things had happened to him in that great city, so strange andso intimate that they might not be spoken of. He spoke wistfully of asudden leaving, a breaking of old ties, a flight into a strange world,ending in this dreary valley, and Ettie listened, her dark eyes gleamingwith pity and with sympathy—those two qualities which may turn sorapidly and so naturally to love.

McMurdo had obtained a temporary job as bookkeeper for he was awell-educated man. This kept him out most of the day, and he had not foundoccasion yet to report himself to the head of the lodge of the EminentOrder of Freemen. He was reminded of his omission, however, by a visit oneevening from Mike Scanlan, the fellow member whom he had met in the train.Scanlan, the small, sharp-faced, nervous, black-eyed man, seemed glad tosee him once more. After a glass or two of whisky he broached the objectof his visit.

“Say, McMurdo,” said he, “I remembered your address, so I made bold tocall. I'm surprised that you've not reported to the Bodymaster. Whyhaven't you seen Boss McGinty yet?”

“Well, I had to find a job. I have been busy.”

“You must find time for him if you have none for anything else. Good Lord,man! you're a fool not to have been down to the Union House and registeredyour name the first morning after you came here! If you run against him—well,you mustn't, that's all!”

McMurdo showed mild surprise. “I've been a member of the lodge for overtwo years, Scanlan, but I never heard that duties were so pressing as allthat.”

“Maybe not in Chicago.”

“Well, it's the same society here.”

“Is it?”

Scanlan looked at him long and fixedly. There was something sinister inhis eyes.

“Isn't it?”

“You'll tell me that in a month's time. I hear you had a talk with thepatrolmen after I left the train.”

“How did you know that?”

“Oh, it got about—things do get about for good and for bad in thisdistrict.”

“Well, yes. I told the hounds what I thought of them.”

“By the Lord, you'll be a man after McGinty's heart!”

“What, does he hate the police too?”

Scanlan burst out laughing. “You go and see him, my lad,” said he as hetook his leave. “It's not the police but you that he'll hate if you don't!Now, take a friend's advice and go at once!”

It chanced that on the same evening McMurdo had another more pressinginterview which urged him in the same direction. It may have been that hisattentions to Ettie had been more evident than before, or that they hadgradually obtruded themselves into the slow mind of his good German host;but, whatever the cause, the boarding-house keeper beckoned the young maninto his private room and started on the subject without anycircumlocution.

“It seems to me, mister,” said he, “that you are gettin' set on my Ettie.Ain't that so, or am I wrong?”

“Yes, that is so,” the young man answered.

“Vell, I vant to tell you right now that it ain't no manner of use.There's someone slipped in afore you.”

“She told me so.”

“Vell, you can lay that she told you truth. But did she tell you who itvas?”

“No, I asked her; but she wouldn't tell.”

“I dare say not, the leetle baggage! Perhaps she did not vish to frightenyou avay.”

“Frighten!” McMurdo was on fire in a moment.

“Ah, yes, my friend! You need not be ashamed to be frightened of him. Itis Teddy Baldwin.”

“And who the devil is he?”

“He is a boss of Scowrers.”

“Scowrers! I've heard of them before. It's Scowrers here and Scowrersthere, and always in a whisper! What are you all afraid of? Who are theScowrers?”

The boarding-house keeper instinctively sank his voice, as everyone didwho talked about that terrible society. “The Scowrers,” said he, “are theEminent Order of Freemen!”

The young man stared. “Why, I am a member of that order myself.”

“You! I vould never have had you in my house if I had known it—notif you vere to pay me a hundred dollar a veek.”

“What's wrong with the order? It's for charity and good fellowship. Therules say so.”

“Maybe in some places. Not here!”

“What is it here?”

“It's a murder society, that's vat it is.”

McMurdo laughed incredulously. “How can you prove that?” he asked.

“Prove it! Are there not fifty murders to prove it? Vat about Milman andVan Shorst, and the Nicholson family, and old Mr. Hyam, and little BillyJames, and the others? Prove it! Is there a man or a voman in this valleyvat does not know it?”

“See here!” said McMurdo earnestly. “I want you to take back what you'vesaid, or else make it good. One or the other you must do before I quitthis room. Put yourself in my place. Here am I, a stranger in the town. Ibelong to a society that I know only as an innocent one. You'll find itthrough the length and breadth of the States, but always as an innocentone. Now, when I am counting upon joining it here, you tell me that it isthe same as a murder society called the Scowrers. I guess you owe meeither an apology or else an explanation, Mr. Shafter.”

“I can but tell you vat the whole vorld knows, mister. The bosses of theone are the bosses of the other. If you offend the one, it is the othervat vill strike you. We have proved it too often.”

“That's just gossip—I want proof!” said McMurdo.

“If you live here long you vill get your proof. But I forget that you areyourself one of them. You vill soon be as bad as the rest. But you villfind other lodgings, mister. I cannot have you here. Is it not bad enoughthat one of these people come courting my Ettie, and that I dare not turnhim down, but that I should have another for my boarder? Yes, indeed, youshall not sleep here after to-night!”

McMurdo found himself under sentence of banishment both from hiscomfortable quarters and from the girl whom he loved. He found her alonein the sitting-room that same evening, and he poured his troubles into herear.

“Sure, your father is after giving me notice,” he said. “It's little Iwould care if it was just my room, but indeed, Ettie, though it's only aweek that I've known you, you are the very breath of life to me, and Ican't live without you!”

“Oh, hush, Mr. McMurdo, don't speak so!” said the girl. “I have told you,have I not, that you are too late? There is another, and if I have notpromised to marry him at once, at least I can promise no one else.”

“Suppose I had been first, Ettie, would I have had a chance?”

The girl sank her face into her hands. “I wish to heaven that you had beenfirst!” she sobbed.

McMurdo was down on his knees before her in an instant. “For God's sake,Ettie, let it stand at that!” he cried. “Will you ruin your life and myown for the sake of this promise? Follow your heart, acushla! 'Tis a saferguide than any promise before you knew what it was that you were saying.”

He had seized Ettie's white hand between his own strong brown ones.

“Say that you will be mine, and we will face it out together!”

“Not here?”

“Yes, here.”

“No, no, Jack!” His arms were round her now. “It could not be here. Couldyou take me away?”

A struggle passed for a moment over McMurdo's face; but it ended bysetting like granite. “No, here,” he said. “I'll hold you against theworld, Ettie, right here where we are!”

“Why should we not leave together?”

“No, Ettie, I can't leave here.”

“But why?”

“I'd never hold my head up again if I felt that I had been driven out.Besides, what is there to be afraid of? Are we not free folks in a freecountry? If you love me, and I you, who will dare to come between?”

“You don't know, Jack. You've been here too short a time. You don't knowthis Baldwin. You don't know McGinty and his Scowrers.”

“No, I don't know them, and I don't fear them, and I don't believe inthem!” said McMurdo. “I've lived among rough men, my darling, and insteadof fearing them it has always ended that they have feared me—always,Ettie. It's mad on the face of it! If these men, as your father says, havedone crime after crime in the valley, and if everyone knows them by name,how comes it that none are brought to justice? You answer me that, Ettie!”

“Because no witness dares to appear against them. He would not live amonth if he did. Also because they have always their own men to swear thatthe accused one was far from the scene of the crime. But surely, Jack, youmust have read all this. I had understood that every paper in the UnitedStates was writing about it.”

“Well, I have read something, it is true; but I had thought it was astory. Maybe these men have some reason in what they do. Maybe they arewronged and have no other way to help themselves.”

“Oh, Jack, don't let me hear you speak so! That is how he speaks—theother one!”

“Baldwin—he speaks like that, does he?”

“And that is why I loathe him so. Oh, Jack, now I can tell you the truth.I loathe him with all my heart; but I fear him also. I fear him formyself; but above all I fear him for father. I know that some great sorrowwould come upon us if I dared to say what I really felt. That is why Ihave put him off with half-promises. It was in real truth our only hope.But if you would fly with me, Jack, we could take father with us and liveforever far from the power of these wicked men.”

Again there was the struggle upon McMurdo's face, and again it set likegranite. “No harm shall come to you, Ettie—nor to your fathereither. As to wicked men, I expect you may find that I am as bad as theworst of them before we're through.”

“No, no, Jack! I would trust you anywhere.”

McMurdo laughed bitterly. “Good Lord! how little you know of me! Yourinnocent soul, my darling, could not even guess what is passing in mine.But, hullo, who's the visitor?”

The door had opened suddenly, and a young fellow came swaggering in withthe air of one who is the master. He was a handsome, dashing young man ofabout the same age and build as McMurdo himself. Under his broad-brimmedblack felt hat, which he had not troubled to remove, a handsome face withfierce, domineering eyes and a curved hawk-bill of a nose looked savagelyat the pair who sat by the stove.

Ettie had jumped to her feet full of confusion and alarm. “I'm glad to seeyou, Mr. Baldwin,” said she. “You're earlier than I had thought. Come andsit down.”

Baldwin stood with his hands on his hips looking at McMurdo. “Who isthis?” he asked curtly.

“It's a friend of mine, Mr. Baldwin, a new boarder here. Mr. McMurdo, mayI introduce you to Mr. Baldwin?”

The young men nodded in surly fashion to each other.

“Maybe Miss Ettie has told you how it is with us?” said Baldwin.

“I didn't understand that there was any relation between you.”

“Didn't you? Well, you can understand it now. You can take it from me thatthis young lady is mine, and you'll find it a very fine evening for awalk.”

“Thank you, I am in no humour for a walk.”

“Aren't you?” The man's savage eyes were blazing with anger. “Maybe youare in a humour for a fight, Mr. Boarder!”

“That I am!” cried McMurdo, springing to his feet. “You never said a morewelcome word.”

“For God's sake, Jack! Oh, for God's sake!” cried poor, distracted Ettie.“Oh, Jack, Jack, he will hurt you!”

“Oh, it's Jack, is it?” said Baldwin with an oath. “You've come to thatalready, have you?”

“Oh, Ted, be reasonable—be kind! For my sake, Ted, if ever you lovedme, be big-hearted and forgiving!”

“I think, Ettie, that if you were to leave us alone we could get thisthing settled,” said McMurdo quietly. “Or maybe, Mr. Baldwin, you willtake a turn down the street with me. It's a fine evening, and there's someopen ground beyond the next block.”

“I'll get even with you without needing to dirty my hands,” said hisenemy. “You'll wish you had never set foot in this house before I amthrough with you!”

“No time like the present,” cried McMurdo.

“I'll choose my own time, mister. You can leave the time to me. See here!”He suddenly rolled up his sleeve and showed upon his forearm a peculiarsign which appeared to have been branded there. It was a circle with atriangle within it. “D'you know what that means?”

“I neither know nor care!”

“Well, you will know, I'll promise you that. You won't be much older,either. Perhaps Miss Ettie can tell you something about it. As to you,Ettie, you'll come back to me on your knees—d'ye hear, girl?—onyour knees—and then I'll tell you what your punishment may be.You've sowed—and by the Lord, I'll see that you reap!” He glanced atthem both in fury. Then he turned upon his heel, and an instant later theouter door had banged behind him.

For a few moments McMurdo and the girl stood in silence. Then she threwher arms around him.

“Oh, Jack, how brave you were! But it is no use, you must fly! To-night—Jack—to-night!It's your only hope. He will have your life. I read it in his horribleeyes. What chance have you against a dozen of them, with Boss McGinty andall the power of the lodge behind them?”

McMurdo disengaged her hands, kissed her, and gently pushed her back intoa chair. “There, acushla, there! Don't be disturbed or fear for me. I'm aFreeman myself. I'm after telling your father about it. Maybe I am nobetter than the others; so don't make a saint of me. Perhaps you hate metoo, now that I've told you as much?”

“Hate you, Jack? While life lasts I could never do that! I've heard thatthere is no harm in being a Freeman anywhere but here; so why should Ithink the worse of you for that? But if you are a Freeman, Jack, whyshould you not go down and make a friend of Boss McGinty? Oh, hurry, Jack,hurry! Get your word in first, or the hounds will be on your trail.”

“I was thinking the same thing,” said McMurdo. “I'll go right now and fixit. You can tell your father that I'll sleep here to-night and find someother quarters in the morning.”

The bar of McGinty's saloon was crowded as usual; for it was the favouriteloafing place of all the rougher elements of the town. The man waspopular; for he had a rough, jovial disposition which formed a mask,covering a great deal which lay behind it. But apart from this popularity,the fear in which he was held throughout the township, and indeed down thewhole thirty miles of the valley and past the mountains on each side ofit, was enough in itself to fill his bar; for none could afford to neglecthis good will.

Besides those secret powers which it was universally believed that heexercised in so pitiless a fashion, he was a high public official, amunicipal councillor, and a commissioner of roads, elected to the officethrough the votes of the ruffians who in turn expected to receive favoursat his hands. Assessments and taxes were enormous; the public works werenotoriously neglected, the accounts were slurred over by bribed auditors,and the decent citizen was terrorized into paying public blackmail, andholding his tongue lest some worse thing befall him.

Thus it was that, year by year, Boss McGinty's diamond pins became moreobtrusive, his gold chains more weighty across a more gorgeous vest, andhis saloon stretched farther and farther, until it threatened to absorbone whole side of the Market Square.

McMurdo pushed open the swinging door of the saloon and made his way amidthe crowd of men within, through an atmosphere blurred with tobacco smokeand heavy with the smell of spirits. The place was brilliantly lighted,and the huge, heavily gilt mirrors upon every wall reflected andmultiplied the garish illumination. There were several bartenders in theirshirt sleeves, hard at work mixing drinks for the loungers who fringed thebroad, brass-trimmed counter.

At the far end, with his body resting upon the bar and a cigar stuck at anacute angle from the corner of his mouth, stood a tall, strong, heavilybuilt man who could be none other than the famous McGinty himself. He wasa black-maned giant, bearded to the cheek-bones, and with a shock of ravenhair which fell to his collar. His complexion was as swarthy as that of anItalian, and his eyes were of a strange dead black, which, combined with aslight squint, gave them a particularly sinister appearance.

All else in the man—his noble proportions, his fine features, andhis frank bearing—fitted in with that jovial, man-to-man mannerwhich he affected. Here, one would say, is a bluff, honest fellow, whoseheart would be sound however rude his outspoken words might seem. It wasonly when those dead, dark eyes, deep and remorseless, were turned upon aman that he shrank within himself, feeling that he was face to face withan infinite possibility of latent evil, with a strength and courage andcunning behind it which made it a thousand times more deadly.

Having had a good look at his man, McMurdo elbowed his way forward withhis usual careless audacity, and pushed himself through the little groupof courtiers who were fawning upon the powerful boss, laughinguproariously at the smallest of his jokes. The young stranger's bold grayeyes looked back fearlessly through their glasses at the deadly black oneswhich turned sharply upon him.

“Well, young man, I can't call your face to mind.”

“I'm new here, Mr. McGinty.”

“You are not so new that you can't give a gentleman his proper title.”

“He's Councillor McGinty, young man,” said a voice from the group.

“I'm sorry, Councillor. I'm strange to the ways of the place. But I wasadvised to see you.”

“Well, you see me. This is all there is. What d'you think of me?”

“Well, it's early days. If your heart is as big as your body, and yoursoul as fine as your face, then I'd ask for nothing better,” said McMurdo.

“By Gar! you've got an Irish tongue in your head anyhow,” cried thesaloon-keeper, not quite certain whether to humour this audacious visitoror to stand upon his dignity.

“So you are good enough to pass my appearance?”

“Sure,” said McMurdo.

“And you were told to see me?”

“I was.”

“And who told you?”

“Brother Scanlan of Lodge 341, Vermissa. I drink your health Councillor,and to our better acquaintance.” He raised a glass with which he had beenserved to his lips and elevated his little finger as he drank it.

McGinty, who had been watching him narrowly, raised his thick blackeyebrows. “Oh, it's like that, is it?” said he. “I'll have to look a bitcloser into this, Mister—”

“McMurdo.”

“A bit closer, Mr. McMurdo; for we don't take folk on trust in these parts,nor believe all we're told neither. Come in here for a moment, behind thebar.”

There was a small room there, lined with barrels. McGinty carefully closedthe door, and then seated himself on one of them, biting thoughtfully onhis cigar and surveying his companion with those disquieting eyes. For acouple of minutes he sat in complete silence. McMurdo bore the inspectioncheerfully, one hand in his coat pocket, the other twisting his brownmoustache. Suddenly McGinty stooped and produced a wicked-lookingrevolver.

“See here, my joker,” said he, “if I thought you were playing any game onus, it would be short work for you.”

“This is a strange welcome,” McMurdo answered with some dignity, “for theBodymaster of a lodge of Freemen to give to a stranger brother.”

“Ay, but it's just that same that you have to prove,” said McGinty, “andGod help you if you fail! Where were you made?”

“Lodge 29, Chicago.”

“When?”

“June 24, 1872.”

“What Bodymaster?”

“James H. Scott.”

“Who is your district ruler?”

“Bartholomew Wilson.”

“Hum! You seem glib enough in your tests. What are you doing here?”

“Working, the same as you—but a poorer job.”

“You have your back answer quick enough.”

“Yes, I was always quick of speech.”

“Are you quick of action?”

“I have had that name among those that knew me best.”

“Well, we may try you sooner than you think. Have you heard anything ofthe lodge in these parts?”

“I've heard that it takes a man to be a brother.”

“True for you, Mr. McMurdo. Why did you leave Chicago?”

“I'm damned if I tell you that!”

McGinty opened his eyes. He was not used to being answered in suchfashion, and it amused him. “Why won't you tell me?”

“Because no brother may tell another a lie.”

“Then the truth is too bad to tell?”

“You can put it that way if you like.”

“See here, mister, you can't expect me, as Bodymaster, to pass into thelodge a man for whose past he can't answer.”

McMurdo looked puzzled. Then he took a worn newspaper cutting from aninner pocket.

“You wouldn't squeal on a fellow?” said he.

“I'll wipe my hand across your face if you say such words to me!” criedMcGinty hotly.

“You are right, Councillor,” said McMurdo meekly. “I should apologize. Ispoke without thought. Well, I know that I am safe in your hands. Look atthat clipping.”

McGinty glanced his eyes over the account of the shooting of one JonasPinto, in the Lake Saloon, Market Street, Chicago, in the New Year week of1874.

“Your work?” he asked, as he handed back the paper.

McMurdo nodded.

“Why did you shoot him?”

“I was helping Uncle Sam to make dollars. Maybe mine were not as good goldas his, but they looked as well and were cheaper to make. This man Pintohelped me to shove the queer—”

“To do what?”

“Well, it means to pass the dollars out into circulation. Then he said hewould split. Maybe he did split. I didn't wait to see. I just killed himand lighted out for the coal country.”

“Why the coal country?”

“'Cause I'd read in the papers that they weren't too particular in thoseparts.”

McGinty laughed. “You were first a coiner and then a murderer, and youcame to these parts because you thought you'd be welcome.”

“That's about the size of it,” McMurdo answered.

“Well, I guess you'll go far. Say, can you make those dollars yet?”

McMurdo took half a dozen from his pocket. “Those never passed thePhiladelphia mint,” said he.

“You don't say!” McGinty held them to the light in his enormous hand,which was hairy as a gorilla's. “I can see no difference. Gar! you'll be amighty useful brother, I'm thinking! We can do with a bad man or two amongus, Friend McMurdo: for there are times when we have to take our own part.We'd soon be against the wall if we didn't shove back at those that werepushing us.”

“Well, I guess I'll do my share of shoving with the rest of the boys.”

“You seem to have a good nerve. You didn't squirm when I shoved this gunat you.”

“It was not me that was in danger.”

“Who then?”

“It was you, Councillor.” McMurdo drew a cocked pistol from the sidepocket of his peajacket. “I was covering you all the time. I guess my shotwould have been as quick as yours.”

“By Gar!” McGinty flushed an angry red and then burst into a roar oflaughter. “Say, we've had no such holy terror come to hand this many ayear. I reckon the lodge will learn to be proud of you.... Well, what thehell do you want? And can't I speak alone with a gentleman for fiveminutes but you must butt in on us?”

The bartender stood abashed. “I'm sorry, Councillor, but it's Ted Baldwin.He says he must see you this very minute.”

The message was unnecessary; for the set, cruel face of the man himselfwas looking over the servant's shoulder. He pushed the bartender out andclosed the door on him.

“So,” said he with a furious glance at McMurdo, “you got here first, didyou? I've a word to say to you, Councillor, about this man.”

“Then say it here and now before my face,” cried McMurdo.

“I'll say it at my own time, in my own way.”

“Tut! Tut!” said McGinty, getting off his barrel. “This will never do. Wehave a new brother here, Baldwin, and it's not for us to greet him in suchfashion. Hold out your hand, man, and make it up!”

“Never!” cried Baldwin in a fury.

“I've offered to fight him if he thinks I have wronged him,” said McMurdo.“I'll fight him with fists, or, if that won't satisfy him, I'll fight himany other way he chooses. Now, I'll leave it to you, Councillor, to judgebetween us as a Bodymaster should.”

“What is it, then?”

“A young lady. She's free to choose for herself.”

“Is she?” cried Baldwin.

“As between two brothers of the lodge I should say that she was,” said theBoss.

“Oh, that's your ruling, is it?”

“Yes, it is, Ted Baldwin,” said McGinty, with a wicked stare. “Is it youthat would dispute it?”

“You would throw over one that has stood by you this five years in favourof a man that you never saw before in your life? You're not Bodymaster forlife, Jack McGinty, and by God! when next it comes to a vote—”

The Councillor sprang at him like a tiger. His hand closed round theother's neck, and he hurled him back across one of the barrels. In his madfury he would have squeezed the life out of him if McMurdo had notinterfered.

“Easy, Councillor! For heaven's sake, go easy!” he cried, as he draggedhim back.

McGinty released his hold, and Baldwin, cowed and shaken gasping forbreath, and shivering in every limb, as one who has looked over the veryedge of death, sat up on the barrel over which he had been hurled.

“You've been asking for it this many a day, Ted Baldwin—now you'vegot it!” cried McGinty, his huge chest rising and falling. “Maybe youthink if I was voted down from Bodymaster you would find yourself in myshoes. It's for the lodge to say that. But so long as I am the chief I'llhave no man lift his voice against me or my rulings.”

“I have nothing against you,” mumbled Baldwin, feeling his throat.

“Well, then,” cried the other, relapsing in a moment into a bluffjoviality, “we are all good friends again and there's an end of thematter.”

He took a bottle of champagne down from the shelf and twisted out thecork.

“See now,” he continued, as he filled three high glasses. “Let us drinkthe quarrelling toast of the lodge. After that, as you know, there can beno bad blood between us. Now, then the left hand on the apple of mythroat. I say to you, Ted Baldwin, what is the offense, sir?”

“The clouds are heavy,” answered Baldwin

“But they will forever brighten.”

“And this I swear!”

The men drank their glasses, and the same ceremony was performed betweenBaldwin and McMurdo

“There!” cried McGinty, rubbing his hands. “That's the end of the blackblood. You come under lodge discipline if it goes further, and that's aheavy hand in these parts, as Brother Baldwin knows—and as you willdamn soon find out, Brother McMurdo, if you ask for trouble!”

“Faith, I'd be slow to do that,” said McMurdo. He held out his hand toBaldwin. “I'm quick to quarrel and quick to forgive. It's my hot Irishblood, they tell me. But it's over for me, and I bear no grudge.”

Baldwin had to take the proffered hand; for the baleful eye of theterrible Boss was upon him. But his sullen face showed how little thewords of the other had moved him.

McGinty clapped them both on the shoulders. “Tut! These girls! Thesegirls!” he cried. “To think that the same petticoats should come betweentwo of my boys! It's the devil's own luck! Well, it's the colleen insideof them that must settle the question; for it's outside the jurisdictionof a Bodymaster—and the Lord be praised for that! We have enough onus, without the women as well. You'll have to be affiliated to Lodge 341,Brother McMurdo. We have our own ways and methods, different from Chicago.Saturday night is our meeting, and if you come then, we'll make you freeforever of the Vermissa Valley.”

Chapter 3 — Lodge 341, Vermissa

On the day following the evening which had contained so many excitingevents, McMurdo moved his lodgings from old Jacob Shafter's and took uphis quarters at the Widow MacNamara's on the extreme outskirts of thetown. Scanlan, his original acquaintance aboard the train, had occasionshortly afterwards to move into Vermissa, and the two lodged together.There was no other boarder, and the hostess was an easy-going oldIrishwoman who left them to themselves; so that they had a freedom forspeech and action welcome to men who had secrets in common.

Shafter had relented to the extent of letting McMurdo come to his mealsthere when he liked; so that his intercourse with Ettie was by no meansbroken. On the contrary, it drew closer and more intimate as the weekswent by.

In his bedroom at his new abode McMurdo felt it safe to take out thecoining moulds, and under many a pledge of secrecy a number of brothersfrom the lodge were allowed to come in and see them, each carrying away inhis pocket some examples of the false money, so cunningly struck thatthere was never the slightest difficulty or danger in passing it. Why,with such a wonderful art at his command, McMurdo should condescend towork at all was a perpetual mystery to his companions; though he made itclear to anyone who asked him that if he lived without any visible meansit would very quickly bring the police upon his track.

One policeman was indeed after him already; but the incident, as luckwould have it, did the adventurer a great deal more good than harm. Afterthe first introduction there were few evenings when he did not find hisway to McGinty's saloon, there to make closer acquaintance with “theboys,” which was the jovial title by which the dangerous gang who infestedthe place were known to one another. His dashing manner and fearlessnessof speech made him a favourite with them all; while the rapid andscientific way in which he polished off his antagonist in an “all in”bar-room scrap earned the respect of that rough community. Anotherincident, however, raised him even higher in their estimation.

Just at the crowded hour one night, the door opened and a man entered withthe quiet blue uniform and peaked cap of the mine police. This was aspecial body raised by the railways and colliery owners to supplement theefforts of the ordinary civil police, who were perfectly helpless in theface of the organized ruffianism which terrorized the district. There wasa hush as he entered, and many a curious glance was cast at him; but therelations between policemen and criminals are peculiar in some parts ofthe States, and McGinty himself, standing behind his counter, showed nosurprise when the policeman enrolled himself among his customers.

“A straight whisky; for the night is bitter,” said the police officer. “Idon't think we have met before, Councillor?”

“You'll be the new captain?” said McGinty.

“That's so. We're looking to you, Councillor, and to the other leadingcitizens, to help us in upholding law and order in this township. CaptainMarvin is my name.”

“We'd do better without you, Captain Marvin,” said McGinty coldly; “for wehave our own police of the township, and no need for any imported goods.What are you but the paid tool of the capitalists, hired by them to clubor shoot your poorer fellow citizen?”

“Well, well, we won't argue about that,” said the police officergood-humouredly. “I expect we all do our duty same as we see it; but wecan't all see it the same.” He had drunk off his glass and had turned togo, when his eyes fell upon the face of Jack McMurdo, who was scowling athis elbow. “Hullo! Hullo!” he cried, looking him up and down. “Here's anold acquaintance!”

McMurdo shrank away from him. “I was never a friend to you nor any othercursed copper in my life,” said he.

“An acquaintance isn't always a friend,” said the police captain,grinning. “You're Jack McMurdo of Chicago, right enough, and don't youdeny it!”

McMurdo shrugged his shoulders. “I'm not denying it,” said he. “D'ye thinkI'm ashamed of my own name?”

“You've got good cause to be, anyhow.”

“What the devil d'you mean by that?” he roared with his fists clenched.

“No, no, Jack, bluster won't do with me. I was an officer in Chicagobefore ever I came to this darned coal bunker, and I know a Chicago crookwhen I see one.”

McMurdo's face fell. “Don't tell me that you're Marvin of the ChicagoCentral!” he cried.

“Just the same old Teddy Marvin, at your service. We haven't forgotten theshooting of Jonas Pinto up there.”

“I never shot him.”

“Did you not? That's good impartial evidence, ain't it? Well, his deathcame in uncommon handy for you, or they would have had you for shoving thequeer. Well, we can let that be bygones; for, between you and me—andperhaps I'm going further than my duty in saying it—they could getno clear case against you, and Chicago's open to you to-morrow.”

“I'm very well where I am.”

“Well, I've given you the pointer, and you're a sulky dog not to thank mefor it.”

“Well, I suppose you mean well, and I do thank you,” said McMurdo in novery gracious manner.

“It's mum with me so long as I see you living on the straight,” said thecaptain. “But, by the Lord! if you get off after this, it's another story!So good-night to you—and good-night, Councillor.”

He left the bar-room; but not before he had created a local hero.McMurdo's deeds in far Chicago had been whispered before. He had put offall questions with a smile, as one who did not wish to have greatnessthrust upon him. But now the thing was officially confirmed. The barloafers crowded round him and shook him heartily by the hand. He was freeof the community from that time on. He could drink hard and show littletrace of it; but that evening, had his mate Scanlan not been at hand tolead him home, the feted hero would surely have spent his night under thebar.

On a Saturday night McMurdo was introduced to the lodge. He had thought topass in without ceremony as being an initiate of Chicago; but there wereparticular rites in Vermissa of which they were proud, and these had to beundergone by every postulant. The assembly met in a large room reservedfor such purposes at the Union House. Some sixty members assembled atVermissa; but that by no means represented the full strength of theorganization, for there were several other lodges in the valley, andothers across the mountains on each side, who exchanged members when anyserious business was afoot, so that a crime might be done by men who werestrangers to the locality. Altogether there were not less than fivehundred scattered over the coal district.

In the bare assembly room the men were gathered round a long table. At theside was a second one laden with bottles and glasses, on which somemembers of the company were already turning their eyes. McGinty sat at thehead with a flat black velvet cap upon his shock of tangled black hair,and a coloured purple stole round his neck, so that he seemed to be apriest presiding over some diabolical ritual. To right and left of himwere the higher lodge officials, the cruel, handsome face of Ted Baldwinamong them. Each of these wore some scarf or medallion as emblem of hisoffice.

They were, for the most part, men of mature age; but the rest of thecompany consisted of young fellows from eighteen to twenty-five, the readyand capable agents who carried out the commands of their seniors. Amongthe older men were many whose features showed the tigerish, lawless soulswithin; but looking at the rank and file it was difficult to believe thatthese eager and open-faced young fellows were in very truth a dangerousgang of murderers, whose minds had suffered such complete moral perversionthat they took a horrible pride in their proficiency at the business, andlooked with deepest respect at the man who had the reputation of makingwhat they called “a clean job.”

To their contorted natures it had become a spirited and chivalrous thingto volunteer for service against some man who had never injured them, andwhom in many cases they had never seen in their lives. The crimecommitted, they quarrelled as to who had actually struck the fatal blow,and amused one another and the company by describing the cries andcontortions of the murdered man.

At first they had shown some secrecy in their arrangements; but at thetime which this narrative describes their proceedings were extraordinarilyopen, for the repeated failure of the law had proved to them that, on theone hand, no one would dare to witness against them, and on the other theyhad an unlimited number of stanch witnesses upon whom they could call, anda well-filled treasure chest from which they could draw the funds toengage the best legal talent in the state. In ten long years of outragethere had been no single conviction, and the only danger that everthreatened the Scowrers lay in the victim himself—who, howeveroutnumbered and taken by surprise, might and occasionally did leave hismark upon his assailants.

McMurdo had been warned that some ordeal lay before him; but no one wouldtell him in what it consisted. He was led now into an outer room by twosolemn brothers. Through the plank partition he could hear the murmur ofmany voices from the assembly within. Once or twice he caught the sound ofhis own name, and he knew that they were discussing his candidacy. Thenthere entered an inner guard with a green and gold sash across his chest.

“The Bodymaster orders that he shall be trussed, blinded, and entered,”said he.

The three of them removed his coat, turned up the sleeve of his right arm,and finally passed a rope round above the elbows and made it fast. Theynext placed a thick black cap right over his head and the upper part ofhis face, so that he could see nothing. He was then led into the assemblyhall.

It was pitch dark and very oppressive under his hood. He heard the rustleand murmur of the people round him, and then the voice of McGinty soundeddull and distant through the covering of his ears.

“John McMurdo,” said the voice, “are you already a member of the AncientOrder of Freemen?”

He bowed in assent.

“Is your lodge No. 29, Chicago?”

He bowed again.

“Dark nights are unpleasant,” said the voice.

“Yes, for strangers to travel,” he answered.

“The clouds are heavy.”

“Yes, a storm is approaching.”

“Are the brethren satisfied?” asked the Bodymaster.

There was a general murmur of assent.

“We know, Brother, by your sign and by your countersign that you areindeed one of us,” said McGinty. “We would have you know, however, that inthis county and in other counties of these parts we have certain rites,and also certain duties of our own which call for good men. Are you readyto be tested?”

“I am.”

“Are you of stout heart?”

“I am.”

“Take a stride forward to prove it.”

As the words were said he felt two hard points in front of his eyes,pressing upon them so that it appeared as if he could not move forwardwithout a danger of losing them. None the less, he nerved himself to stepresolutely out, and as he did so the pressure melted away. There was a lowmurmur of applause.

“He is of stout heart,” said the voice. “Can you bear pain?”

“As well as another,” he answered.

“Test him!”

It was all he could do to keep himself from screaming out, for anagonizing pain shot through his forearm. He nearly fainted at the suddenshock of it; but he bit his lip and clenched his hands to hide his agony.

“I can take more than that,” said he.

This time there was loud applause. A finer first appearance had never beenmade in the lodge. Hands clapped him on the back, and the hood was pluckedfrom his head. He stood blinking and smiling amid the congratulations ofthe brothers.

“One last word, Brother McMurdo,” said McGinty. “You have already swornthe oath of secrecy and fidelity, and you are aware that the punishmentfor any breach of it is instant and inevitable death?”

“I am,” said McMurdo.

“And you accept the rule of the Bodymaster for the time being under allcircumstances?”

“I do.”

“Then in the name of Lodge 341, Vermissa, I welcome you to its privilegesand debates. You will put the liquor on the table, Brother Scanlan, and wewill drink to our worthy brother.”

McMurdo's coat had been brought to him; but before putting it on heexamined his right arm, which still smarted heavily. There on the flesh ofthe forearm was a circle with a triangle within it, deep and red, as thebranding iron had left it. One or two of his neighbours pulled up theirsleeves and showed their own lodge marks.

“We've all had it,” said one; “but not all as brave as you over it.”

“Tut! It was nothing,” said he; but it burned and ached all the same.

When the drinks which followed the ceremony of initiation had all beendisposed of, the business of the lodge proceeded. McMurdo, accustomed onlyto the prosaic performances of Chicago, listened with open ears and moresurprise than he ventured to show to what followed.

“The first business on the agenda paper,” said McGinty, “is to read thefollowing letter from Division Master Windle of Merton County Lodge 249.He says:

“Dear Sir:

“There is a job to be done on Andrew Rae of Rae &amp; Sturmash, coalowners near this place. You will remember that your lodge owes us areturn, having had the service of two brethren in the matter of thepatrolman last fall. You will send two good men, they will be taken chargeof by Treasurer Higgins of this lodge, whose address you know. He willshow them when to act and where. Yours in freedom,

“J.W. WINDLE D.M.A.O.F.”

“Windle has never refused us when we have had occasion to ask for the loanof a man or two, and it is not for us to refuse him.” McGinty paused andlooked round the room with his dull, malevolent eyes. “Who will volunteerfor the job?”

Several young fellows held up their hands. The Bodymaster looked at themwith an approving smile.

“You'll do, Tiger Cormac. If you handle it as well as you did the last,you won't be wrong. And you, Wilson.”

“I've no pistol,” said the volunteer, a mere boy in his teens.

“It's your first, is it not? Well, you have to be blooded some time. Itwill be a great start for you. As to the pistol, you'll find it waitingfor you, or I'm mistaken. If you report yourselves on Monday, it will betime enough. You'll get a great welcome when you return.”

“Any reward this time?” asked Cormac, a thick-set, dark-faced,brutal-looking young man, whose ferocity had earned him the nickname of“Tiger.”

“Never mind the reward. You just do it for the honour of the thing. Maybewhen it is done there will be a few odd dollars at the bottom of the box.”

“What has the man done?” asked young Wilson.

“Sure, it's not for the likes of you to ask what the man has done. He hasbeen judged over there. That's no business of ours. All we have to do isto carry it out for them, same as they would for us. Speaking of that, twobrothers from the Merton lodge are coming over to us next week to do somebusiness in this quarter.”

“Who are they?” asked someone.

“Faith, it is wiser not to ask. If you know nothing, you can testifynothing, and no trouble can come of it. But they are men who will make aclean job when they are about it.”

“And time, too!” cried Ted Baldwin. “Folk are gettin' out of hand in theseparts. It was only last week that three of our men were turned off byForeman Blaker. It's been owing him a long time, and he'll get it full andproper.”

“Get what?” McMurdo whispered to his neighbour.

“The business end of a buckshot cartridge!” cried the man with a loudlaugh. “What think you of our ways, Brother?”

McMurdo's criminal soul seemed to have already absorbed the spirit of thevile association of which he was now a member. “I like it well,” said he.“'Tis a proper place for a lad of mettle.”

Several of those who sat around heard his words and applauded them.

“What's that?” cried the black-maned Bodymaster from the end of the table.

“'Tis our new brother, sir, who finds our ways to his taste.”

McMurdo rose to his feet for an instant. “I would say, Eminent Bodymaster,that if a man should be wanted I should take it as an honour to be chosento help the lodge.”

There was great applause at this. It was felt that a new sun was pushingits rim above the horizon. To some of the elders it seemed that theprogress was a little too rapid.

“I would move,” said the secretary, Harraway, a vulture-faced oldgraybeard who sat near the chairman, “that Brother McMurdo should waituntil it is the good pleasure of the lodge to employ him.”

“Sure, that was what I meant; I'm in your hands,” said McMurdo.

“Your time will come, Brother,” said the chairman. “We have marked youdown as a willing man, and we believe that you will do good work in theseparts. There is a small matter to-night in which you may take a hand if itso please you.”

“I will wait for something that is worth while.”

“You can come to-night, anyhow, and it will help you to know what we standfor in this community. I will make the announcement later. Meanwhile,” heglanced at his agenda paper, “I have one or two more points to bringbefore the meeting. First of all, I will ask the treasurer as to our bankbalance. There is the pension to Jim Carnaway's widow. He was struck downdoing the work of the lodge, and it is for us to see that she is not theloser.”

“Jim was shot last month when they tried to kill Chester Wilcox of MarleyCreek,” McMurdo's neighbour informed him.

“The funds are good at the moment,” said the treasurer, with the bankbookin front of him. “The firms have been generous of late. Max Linder &amp;Co. paid five hundred to be left alone. Walker Brothers sent in a hundred;but I took it on myself to return it and ask for five. If I do not hear byWednesday, their winding gear may get out of order. We had to burn theirbreaker last year before they became reasonable. Then the West SectionCoaling Company has paid its annual contribution. We have enough on handto meet any obligations.”

“What about Archie Swindon?” asked a brother.

“He has sold out and left the district. The old devil left a note for usto say that he had rather be a free crossing sweeper in New York than alarge mine owner under the power of a ring of blackmailers. By Gar! it wasas well that he made a break for it before the note reached us! I guess hewon't show his face in this valley again.”

An elderly, clean-shaved man with a kindly face and a good brow rose fromthe end of the table which faced the chairman. “Mr. Treasurer,” he asked,“may I ask who has bought the property of this man that we have driven outof the district?”

“Yes, Brother Morris. It has been bought by the State &amp; Merton CountyRailroad Company.”

“And who bought the mines of Todman and of Lee that came into the marketin the same way last year?”

“The same company, Brother Morris.”

“And who bought the ironworks of Manson and of Shuman and of Van Deher andof Atwood, which have all been given up of late?”

“They were all bought by the West Gilmerton General Mining Company.”

“I don't see, Brother Morris,” said the chairman, “that it matters to uswho buys them, since they can't carry them out of the district.”

“With all respect to you, Eminent Bodymaster, I think it may matter verymuch to us. This process has been going on now for ten long years. We aregradually driving all the small men out of trade. What is the result? Wefind in their places great companies like the Railroad or the GeneralIron, who have their directors in New York or Philadelphia, and carenothing for our threats. We can take it out of their local bosses; but itonly means that others will be sent in their stead. And we are making itdangerous for ourselves. The small men could not harm us. They had not themoney nor the power. So long as we did not squeeze them too dry, theywould stay on under our power. But if these big companies find that westand between them and their profits, they will spare no pains and noexpense to hunt us down and bring us to court.”

There was a hush at these ominous words, and every face darkened as gloomylooks were exchanged. So omnipotent and unchallenged had they been thatthe very thought that there was possible retribution in the background hadbeen banished from their minds. And yet the idea struck a chill to themost reckless of them.

“It is my advice,” the speaker continued, “that we go easier upon thesmall men. On the day that they have all been driven out the power of thissociety will have been broken.”

Unwelcome truths are not popular. There were angry cries as the speakerresumed his seat. McGinty rose with gloom upon his brow.

“Brother Morris,” said he, “you were always a croaker. So long as themembers of this lodge stand together there is no power in the UnitedStates that can touch them. Sure, have we not tried it often enough in thelawcourts? I expect the big companies will find it easier to pay than tofight, same as the little companies do. And now, Brethren,” McGinty tookoff his black velvet cap and his stole as he spoke, “this lodge hasfinished its business for the evening, save for one small matter which maybe mentioned when we are parting. The time has now come for fraternalrefreshment and for harmony.”

Strange indeed is human nature. Here were these men, to whom murder wasfamiliar, who again and again had struck down the father of the family,some man against whom they had no personal feeling, without one thought ofcompunction or of compassion for his weeping wife or helpless children,and yet the tender or pathetic in music could move them to tears. McMurdohad a fine tenor voice, and if he had failed to gain the good will of thelodge before, it could no longer have been withheld after he had thrilledthem with “I'm Sitting on the Stile, Mary,” and “On the Banks of AllanWater.”

In his very first night the new recruit had made himself one of the mostpopular of the brethren, marked already for advancement and high office.There were other qualities needed, however, besides those of goodfellowship, to make a worthy Freeman, and of these he was given an examplebefore the evening was over. The whisky bottle had passed round manytimes, and the men were flushed and ripe for mischief when theirBodymaster rose once more to address them.

“Boys,” said he, “there's one man in this town that wants trimming up, andit's for you to see that he gets it. I'm speaking of James Stanger of theHerald. You've seen how he's been opening his mouth against us again?”

There was a murmur of assent, with many a muttered oath. McGinty took aslip of paper from his waistcoat pocket.

“LAW AND ORDER!”

That's how he heads it.

“REIGN OF TERROR IN THE COAL AND IRON DISTRICT

“Twelve years have now elapsed since the first assassinations which provedthe existence of a criminal organization in our midst. From that day theseoutrages have never ceased, until now they have reached a pitch whichmakes us the opprobrium of the civilized world. Is it for such results asthis that our great country welcomes to its bosom the alien who flies fromthe despotisms of Europe? Is it that they shall themselves become tyrantsover the very men who have given them shelter, and that a state ofterrorism and lawlessness should be established under the very shadow ofthe sacred folds of the starry Flag of Freedom which would raise horror inour minds if we read of it as existing under the most effete monarchy ofthe East? The men are known. The organization is patent and public. Howlong are we to endure it? Can we forever live—

“Sure, I've read enough of the slush!” cried the chairman, tossing thepaper down upon the table. “That's what he says of us. The question I'masking you is what shall we say to him?”

“Kill him!” cried a dozen fierce voices.

“I protest against that,” said Brother Morris, the man of the good browand shaved face. “I tell you, Brethren, that our hand is too heavy in thisvalley, and that there will come a point where in self-defense every manwill unite to crush us out. James Stanger is an old man. He is respectedin the township and the district. His paper stands for all that is solidin the valley. If that man is struck down, there will be a stir throughthis state that will only end with our destruction.”

“And how would they bring about our destruction, Mr. Standback?” criedMcGinty. “Is it by the police? Sure, half of them are in our pay and halfof them afraid of us. Or is it by the law courts and the judge? Haven't wetried that before now, and what ever came of it?”

“There is a Judge Lynch that might try the case,” said Brother Morris.

A general shout of anger greeted the suggestion.

“I have but to raise my finger,” cried McGinty, “and I could put twohundred men into this town that would clear it out from end to end.” Thensuddenly raising his voice and bending his huge black brows into aterrible frown, “See here, Brother Morris, I have my eye on you, and havehad for some time! You've no heart yourself, and you try to take the heartout of others. It will be an ill day for you, Brother Morris, when yourown name comes on our agenda paper, and I'm thinking that it's just therethat I ought to place it.”

Morris had turned deadly pale, and his knees seemed to give way under himas he fell back into his chair. He raised his glass in his trembling handand drank before he could answer. “I apologize, Eminent Bodymaster, to youand to every brother in this lodge if I have said more than I should. I ama faithful member—you all know that—and it is my fear lestevil come to the lodge which makes me speak in anxious words. But I havegreater trust in your judgment than in my own, Eminent Bodymaster, and Ipromise you that I will not offend again.”

The Bodymaster's scowl relaxed as he listened to the humble words. “Verygood, Brother Morris. It's myself that would be sorry if it were needfulto give you a lesson. But so long as I am in this chair we shall be aunited lodge in word and in deed. And now, boys,” he continued, lookinground at the company, “I'll say this much, that if Stanger got his fulldeserts there would be more trouble than we need ask for. These editorshang together, and every journal in the state would be crying out forpolice and troops. But I guess you can give him a pretty severe warning.Will you fix it, Brother Baldwin?”

“Sure!” said the young man eagerly.

“How many will you take?”

“Half a dozen, and two to guard the door. You'll come, Gower, and you,Mansel, and you, Scanlan, and the two Willabys.”

“I promised the new brother he should go,” said the chairman.

Ted Baldwin looked at McMurdo with eyes which showed that he had notforgotten nor forgiven. “Well, he can come if he wants,” he said in asurly voice. “That's enough. The sooner we get to work the better.”

The company broke up with shouts and yells and snatches of drunken song.The bar was still crowded with revellers, and many of the brethrenremained there. The little band who had been told off for duty passed outinto the street, proceeding in twos and threes along the sidewalk so asnot to provoke attention. It was a bitterly cold night, with a half-moonshining brilliantly in a frosty, star-spangled sky. The men stopped andgathered in a yard which faced a high building. The words, “VermissaHerald” were printed in gold lettering between the brightly lit windows.From within came the clanking of the printing press.

“Here, you,” said Baldwin to McMurdo, “you can stand below at the door andsee that the road is kept open for us. Arthur Willaby can stay with you.You others come with me. Have no fears, boys; for we have a dozenwitnesses that we are in the Union Bar at this very moment.”

It was nearly midnight, and the street was deserted save for one or tworevellers upon their way home. The party crossed the road, and, pushingopen the door of the newspaper office, Baldwin and his men rushed in andup the stair which faced them. McMurdo and another remained below. Fromthe room above came a shout, a cry for help, and then the sound oftrampling feet and of falling chairs. An instant later a gray-haired manrushed out on the landing.

He was seized before he could get farther, and his spectacles cametinkling down to McMurdo's feet. There was a thud and a groan. He was onhis face, and half a dozen sticks were clattering together as they fellupon him. He writhed, and his long, thin limbs quivered under the blows.The others ceased at last; but Baldwin, his cruel face set in an infernalsmile, was hacking at the man's head, which he vainly endeavoured todefend with his arms. His white hair was dabbled with patches of blood.Baldwin was still stooping over his victim, putting in a short, viciousblow whenever he could see a part exposed, when McMurdo dashed up thestair and pushed him back.

“You'll kill the man,” said he. “Drop it!”

Baldwin looked at him in amazement. “Curse you!” he cried. “Who are you tointerfere—you that are new to the lodge? Stand back!” He raised hisstick; but McMurdo had whipped his pistol out of his pocket.

“Stand back yourself!” he cried. “I'll blow your face in if you lay a handon me. As to the lodge, wasn't it the order of the Bodymaster that the manwas not to be killed—and what are you doing but killing him?”

“It's truth he says,” remarked one of the men.

“By Gar! you'd best hurry yourselves!” cried the man below. “The windowsare all lighting up, and you'll have the whole town here inside of fiveminutes.”

There was indeed the sound of shouting in the street, and a little groupof compositors and pressmen was forming in the hall below and nervingitself to action. Leaving the limp and motionless body of the editor atthe head of the stair, the criminals rushed down and made their wayswiftly along the street. Having reached the Union House, some of themmixed with the crowd in McGinty's saloon, whispering across the bar to theBoss that the job had been well carried through. Others, and among themMcMurdo, broke away into side streets, and so by devious paths to theirown homes.

Chapter 4 — The Valley of Fear

When McMurdo awoke next morning he had good reason to remember hisinitiation into the lodge. His head ached with the effect of the drink,and his arm, where he had been branded, was hot and swollen. Having hisown peculiar source of income, he was irregular in his attendance at hiswork; so he had a late breakfast, and remained at home for the morningwriting a long letter to a friend. Afterwards he read the Daily Herald. Ina special column put in at the last moment he read:

OUTRAGE AT THE HERALD OFFICE—EDITOR SERIOUSLY INJURED.

It was a short account of the facts with which he was himself morefamiliar than the writer could have been. It ended with the statement:

The matter is now in the hands of the police; but it can hardly be hopedthat their exertions will be attended by any better results than in thepast. Some of the men were recognized, and there is hope that a convictionmay be obtained. The source of the outrage was, it need hardly be said,that infamous society which has held this community in bondage for so longa period, and against which the Herald has taken so uncompromising astand. Mr. Stanger's many friends will rejoice to hear that, though he hasbeen cruelly and brutally beaten, and though he has sustained severeinjuries about the head, there is no immediate danger to his life.

Below it stated that a guard of police, armed with Winchester rifles, hadbeen requisitioned for the defense of the office.

McMurdo had laid down the paper, and was lighting his pipe with a handwhich was shaky from the excesses of the previous evening, when there wasa knock outside, and his landlady brought to him a note which had justbeen handed in by a lad. It was unsigned, and ran thus:

I should wish to speak to you, but would rather not do so in your house.You will find me beside the flagstaff upon Miller Hill. If you will comethere now, I have something which it is important for you to hear and forme to say.

McMurdo read the note twice with the utmost surprise; for he could notimagine what it meant or who was the author of it. Had it been in afeminine hand, he might have imagined that it was the beginning of one ofthose adventures which had been familiar enough in his past life. But itwas the writing of a man, and of a well educated one, too. Finally, aftersome hesitation, he determined to see the matter through.

Miller Hill is an ill-kept public park in the very centre of the town. Insummer it is a favourite resort of the people, but in winter it isdesolate enough. From the top of it one has a view not only of the wholestraggling, grimy town, but of the winding valley beneath, with itsscattered mines and factories blackening the snow on each side of it, andof the wooded and white-capped ranges flanking it.

McMurdo strolled up the winding path hedged in with evergreens until hereached the deserted restaurant which forms the centre of summer gaiety.Beside it was a bare flagstaff, and underneath it a man, his hat drawndown and the collar of his overcoat turned up. When he turned his faceMcMurdo saw that it was Brother Morris, he who had incurred the anger ofthe Bodymaster the night before. The lodge sign was given and exchanged asthey met.

“I wanted to have a word with you, Mr. McMurdo,” said the older man,speaking with a hesitation which showed that he was on delicate ground.“It was kind of you to come.”

“Why did you not put your name to the note?”

“One has to be cautious, mister. One never knows in times like these how athing may come back to one. One never knows either who to trust or who notto trust.”

“Surely one may trust brothers of the lodge.”

“No, no, not always,” cried Morris with vehemence. “Whatever we say, evenwhat we think, seems to go back to that man McGinty.”

“Look here!” said McMurdo sternly. “It was only last night, as you knowwell, that I swore good faith to our Bodymaster. Would you be asking me tobreak my oath?”

“If that is the view you take,” said Morris sadly, “I can only say that Iam sorry I gave you the trouble to come and meet me. Things have come to abad pass when two free citizens cannot speak their thoughts to eachother.”

McMurdo, who had been watching his companion very narrowly, relaxedsomewhat in his bearing. “Sure I spoke for myself only,” said he. “I am anewcomer, as you know, and I am strange to it all. It is not for me toopen my mouth, Mr. Morris, and if you think well to say anything to me Iam here to hear it.”

“And to take it back to Boss McGinty!” said Morris bitterly.

“Indeed, then, you do me injustice there,” cried McMurdo. “For myself I amloyal to the lodge, and so I tell you straight; but I would be a poorcreature if I were to repeat to any other what you might say to me inconfidence. It will go no further than me; though I warn you that you mayget neither help nor sympathy.”

“I have given up looking for either the one or the other,” said Morris. “Imay be putting my very life in your hands by what I say; but, bad as youare—and it seemed to me last night that you were shaping to be asbad as the worst—still you are new to it, and your conscience cannotyet be as hardened as theirs. That was why I thought to speak with you.”

“Well, what have you to say?”

“If you give me away, may a curse be on you!”

“Sure, I said I would not.”

“I would ask you, then, when you joined the Freeman's society in Chicagoand swore vows of charity and fidelity, did ever it cross your mind thatyou might find it would lead you to crime?”

“If you call it crime,” McMurdo answered.

“Call it crime!” cried Morris, his voice vibrating with passion. “You haveseen little of it if you can call it anything else. Was it crime lastnight when a man old enough to be your father was beaten till the blooddripped from his white hairs? Was that crime—or what else would youcall it?”

“There are some would say it was war,” said McMurdo, “a war of two classeswith all in, so that each struck as best it could.”

“Well, did you think of such a thing when you joined the Freeman's societyat Chicago?”

“No, I'm bound to say I did not.”

“Nor did I when I joined it at Philadelphia. It was just a benefit cluband a meeting place for one's fellows. Then I heard of this place—cursethe hour that the name first fell upon my ears!—and I came to bettermyself! My God! to better myself! My wife and three children came with me.I started a drygoods store on Market Square, and I prospered well. Theword had gone round that I was a Freeman, and I was forced to join thelocal lodge, same as you did last night. I've the badge of shame on myforearm and something worse branded on my heart. I found that I was underthe orders of a black villain and caught in a meshwork of crime. Whatcould I do? Every word I said to make things better was taken as treason,same as it was last night. I can't get away; for all I have in the worldis in my store. If I leave the society, I know well that it means murderto me, and God knows what to my wife and children. Oh, man, it is awful—awful!”He put his hands to his face, and his body shook with convulsive sobs.

McMurdo shrugged his shoulders. “You were too soft for the job,” said he.“You are the wrong sort for such work.”

“I had a conscience and a religion; but they made me a criminal amongthem. I was chosen for a job. If I backed down I knew well what would cometo me. Maybe I'm a coward. Maybe it's the thought of my poor little womanand the children that makes me one. Anyhow I went. I guess it will hauntme forever.

“It was a lonely house, twenty miles from here, over the range yonder. Iwas told off for the door, same as you were last night. They could nottrust me with the job. The others went in. When they came out their handswere crimson to the wrists. As we turned away a child was screaming out ofthe house behind us. It was a boy of five who had seen his fathermurdered. I nearly fainted with the horror of it, and yet I had to keep abold and smiling face; for well I knew that if I did not it would be outof my house that they would come next with their bloody hands and it wouldbe my little Fred that would be screaming for his father.

“But I was a criminal then, part sharer in a murder, lost forever in thisworld, and lost also in the next. I am a good Catholic; but the priestwould have no word with me when he heard I was a Scowrer, and I amexcommunicated from my faith. That's how it stands with me. And I see yougoing down the same road, and I ask you what the end is to be. Are youready to be a cold-blooded murderer also, or can we do anything to stopit?”

“What would you do?” asked McMurdo abruptly. “You would not inform?”

“God forbid!” cried Morris. “Sure, the very thought would cost me mylife.”

“That's well,” said McMurdo. “I'm thinking that you are a weak man andthat you make too much of the matter.”

“Too much! Wait till you have lived here longer. Look down the valley! Seethe cloud of a hundred chimneys that overshadows it! I tell you that thecloud of murder hangs thicker and lower than that over the heads of thepeople. It is the Valley of Fear, the Valley of Death. The terror is inthe hearts of the people from the dusk to the dawn. Wait, young man, andyou will learn for yourself.”

“Well, I'll let you know what I think when I have seen more,” said McMurdocarelessly. “What is very clear is that you are not the man for the place,and that the sooner you sell out—if you only get a dime a dollar forwhat the business is worth—the better it will be for you. What youhave said is safe with me; but, by Gar! if I thought you were an informer—”

“No, no!” cried Morris piteously.

“Well, let it rest at that. I'll bear what you have said in mind, andmaybe some day I'll come back to it. I expect you meant kindly by speakingto me like this. Now I'll be getting home.”

“One word before you go,” said Morris. “We may have been seen together.They may want to know what we have spoken about.”

“Ah! that's well thought of.”

“I offer you a clerkship in my store.”

“And I refuse it. That's our business. Well, so long, Brother Morris, andmay you find things go better with you in the future.”

That same afternoon, as McMurdo sat smoking, lost in thought beside thestove of his sitting-room, the door swung open and its framework wasfilled with the huge figure of Boss McGinty. He passed the sign, and thenseating himself opposite to the young man he looked at him steadily forsome time, a look which was as steadily returned.

“I'm not much of a visitor, Brother McMurdo,” he said at last. “I guess Iam too busy over the folk that visit me. But I thought I'd stretch a pointand drop down to see you in your own house.”

“I'm proud to see you here, Councillor,” McMurdo answered heartily,bringing his whisky bottle out of the cupboard. “It's an honour that I hadnot expected.”

“How's the arm?” asked the Boss.

McMurdo made a wry face. “Well, I'm not forgetting it,” he said; “but it'sworth it.”

“Yes, it's worth it,” the other answered, “to those that are loyal and gothrough with it and are a help to the lodge. What were you speaking toBrother Morris about on Miller Hill this morning?”

The question came so suddenly that it was well that he had his answerprepared. He burst into a hearty laugh. “Morris didn't know I could earn aliving here at home. He shan't know either; for he has got too muchconscience for the likes of me. But he's a good-hearted old chap. It washis idea that I was at a loose end, and that he would do me a good turn byoffering me a clerkship in a drygoods store.”

“Oh, that was it?”

“Yes, that was it.”

“And you refused it?”

“Sure. Couldn't I earn ten times as much in my own bedroom with fourhours' work?”

“That's so. But I wouldn't get about too much with Morris.”

“Why not?”

“Well, I guess because I tell you not. That's enough for most folk inthese parts.”

“It may be enough for most folk; but it ain't enough for me, Councillor,”said McMurdo boldly. “If you are a judge of men, you'll know that.”

The swarthy giant glared at him, and his hairy paw closed for an instantround the glass as though he would hurl it at the head of his companion.Then he laughed in his loud, boisterous, insincere fashion.

“You're a queer card, for sure,” said he. “Well, if you want reasons, I'llgive them. Did Morris say nothing to you against the lodge?”

“No.”

“Nor against me?”

“No.”

“Well, that's because he daren't trust you. But in his heart he is not aloyal brother. We know that well. So we watch him and we wait for the timeto admonish him. I'm thinking that the time is drawing near. There's noroom for scabby sheep in our pen. But if you keep company with a disloyalman, we might think that you were disloyal, too. See?”

“There's no chance of my keeping company with him; for I dislike the man,”McMurdo answered. “As to being disloyal, if it was any man but you hewould not use the word to me twice.”

“Well, that's enough,” said McGinty, draining off his glass. “I came downto give you a word in season, and you've had it.”

“I'd like to know,” said McMurdo, “how you ever came to learn that I hadspoken with Morris at all?”

McGinty laughed. “It's my business to know what goes on in this township,”said he. “I guess you'd best reckon on my hearing all that passes. Well,time's up, and I'll just say—”

But his leavetaking was cut short in a very unexpected fashion. With asudden crash the door flew open, and three frowning, intent faces glaredin at them from under the peaks of police caps. McMurdo sprang to his feetand half drew his revolver; but his arm stopped midway as he becameconscious that two Winchester rifles were levelled at his head. A man inuniform advanced into the room, a six-shooter in his hand. It was CaptainMarvin, once of Chicago, and now of the Mine Constabulary. He shook hishead with a half-smile at McMurdo.

“I thought you'd be getting into trouble, Mr. Crooked McMurdo of Chicago,”said he. “Can't keep out of it, can you? Take your hat and come along withus.”

“I guess you'll pay for this, Captain Marvin,” said McGinty. “Who are you,I'd like to know, to break into a house in this fashion and molest honest,law-abiding men?”

“You're standing out in this deal, Councillor McGinty,” said the policecaptain. “We are not out after you, but after this man McMurdo. It is foryou to help, not to hinder us in our duty.”

“He is a friend of mine, and I'll answer for his conduct,” said the Boss.

“By all accounts, Mr. McGinty, you may have to answer for your own conductsome of these days,” the captain answered. “This man McMurdo was a crookbefore ever he came here, and he's a crook still. Cover him, Patrolman,while I disarm him.”

“There's my pistol,” said McMurdo coolly. “Maybe, Captain Marvin, if youand I were alone and face to face you would not take me so easily.”

“Where's your warrant?” asked McGinty. “By Gar! a man might as well livein Russia as in Vermissa while folk like you are running the police. It'sa capitalist outrage, and you'll hear more of it, I reckon.”

“You do what you think is your duty the best way you can, Councillor.We'll look after ours.”

“What am I accused of?” asked McMurdo.

“Of being concerned in the beating of old Editor Stanger at the Heraldoffice. It wasn't your fault that it isn't a murder charge.”

“Well, if that's all you have against him,” cried McGinty with a laugh,“you can save yourself a deal of trouble by dropping it right now. Thisman was with me in my saloon playing poker up to midnight, and I can bringa dozen to prove it.”

“That's your affair, and I guess you can settle it in court to-morrow.Meanwhile, come on, McMurdo, and come quietly if you don't want a gunacross your head. You stand wide, Mr. McGinty; for I warn you I will standno resistance when I am on duty!”

So determined was the appearance of the captain that both McMurdo and hisboss were forced to accept the situation. The latter managed to have a fewwhispered words with the prisoner before they parted.

“What about—” he jerked his thumb upward to signify the coiningplant.

“All right,” whispered McMurdo, who had devised a safe hiding place underthe floor.

“I'll bid you good-bye,” said the Boss, shaking hands. “I'll see Reillythe lawyer and take the defense upon myself. Take my word for it that theywon't be able to hold you.”

“I wouldn't bet on that. Guard the prisoner, you two, and shoot him if hetries any games. I'll search the house before I leave.”

He did so; but apparently found no trace of the concealed plant. When hehad descended he and his men escorted McMurdo to headquarters. Darknesshad fallen, and a keen blizzard was blowing so that the streets werenearly deserted; but a few loiterers followed the group, and emboldened byinvisibility shouted imprecations at the prisoner.

“Lynch the cursed Scowrer!” they cried. “Lynch him!” They laughed andjeered as he was pushed into the police station. After a short, formalexamination from the inspector in charge he was put into the common cell.Here he found Baldwin and three other criminals of the night before, allarrested that afternoon and waiting their trial next morning.

But even within this inner fortress of the law the long arm of the Freemenwas able to extend. Late at night there came a jailer with a straw bundlefor their bedding, out of which he extracted two bottles of whisky, someglasses, and a pack of cards. They spent a hilarious night, without ananxious thought as to the ordeal of the morning.

Nor had they cause, as the result was to show. The magistrate could notpossibly, on the evidence, have held them for a higher court. On the onehand the compositors and pressmen were forced to admit that the light wasuncertain, that they were themselves much perturbed, and that it wasdifficult for them to swear to the identity of the assailants; althoughthey believed that the accused were among them. Cross examined by theclever attorney who had been engaged by McGinty, they were even morenebulous in their evidence.

The injured man had already deposed that he was so taken by surprise bythe suddenness of the attack that he could state nothing beyond the factthat the first man who struck him wore a moustache. He added that he knewthem to be Scowrers, since no one else in the community could possiblyhave any enmity to him, and he had long been threatened on account of hisoutspoken editorials. On the other hand, it was clearly shown by theunited and unfaltering evidence of six citizens, including that highmunicipal official, Councillor McGinty, that the men had been at a cardparty at the Union House until an hour very much later than the commissionof the outrage.

Needless to say that they were discharged with something very near to anapology from the bench for the inconvenience to which they had been put,together with an implied censure of Captain Marvin and the police fortheir officious zeal.

The verdict was greeted with loud applause by a court in which McMurdo sawmany familiar faces. Brothers of the lodge smiled and waved. But therewere others who sat with compressed lips and brooding eyes as the menfiled out of the dock. One of them, a little, dark-bearded, resolutefellow, put the thoughts of himself and comrades into words as theex-prisoners passed him.

“You damned murderers!” he said. “We'll fix you yet!”

Chapter 5 — The Darkest Hour

If anything had been needed to give an impetus to Jack McMurdo'spopularity among his fellows it would have been his arrest and acquittal.That a man on the very night of joining the lodge should have donesomething which brought him before the magistrate was a new record in theannals of the society. Already he had earned the reputation of a good booncompanion, a cheery reveller, and withal a man of high temper, who wouldnot take an insult even from the all-powerful Boss himself. But inaddition to this he impressed his comrades with the idea that among themall there was not one whose brain was so ready to devise a bloodthirstyscheme, or whose hand would be more capable of carrying it out. “He'll bethe boy for the clean job,” said the oldsters to one another, and waitedtheir time until they could set him to his work.

McGinty had instruments enough already; but he recognized that this was asupremely able one. He felt like a man holding a fierce bloodhound inleash. There were curs to do the smaller work; but some day he would slipthis creature upon its prey. A few members of the lodge, Ted Baldwin amongthem, resented the rapid rise of the stranger and hated him for it; butthey kept clear of him, for he was as ready to fight as to laugh.

But if he gained favour with his fellows, there was another quarter, onewhich had become even more vital to him, in which he lost it. EttieShafter's father would have nothing more to do with him, nor would heallow him to enter the house. Ettie herself was too deeply in love to givehim up altogether, and yet her own good sense warned her of what wouldcome from a marriage with a man who was regarded as a criminal.

One morning after a sleepless night she determined to see him, possiblyfor the last time, and make one strong endeavour to draw him from thoseevil influences which were sucking him down. She went to his house, as hehad often begged her to do, and made her way into the room which he usedas his sitting-room. He was seated at a table, with his back turned and aletter in front of him. A sudden spirit of girlish mischief came over her—shewas still only nineteen. He had not heard her when she pushed open thedoor. Now she tiptoed forward and laid her hand lightly upon his bendedshoulders.

If she had expected to startle him, she certainly succeeded; but only inturn to be startled herself. With a tiger spring he turned on her, and hisright hand was feeling for her throat. At the same instant with the otherhand he crumpled up the paper that lay before him. For an instant he stoodglaring. Then astonishment and joy took the place of the ferocity whichhad convulsed his features—a ferocity which had sent her shrinkingback in horror as from something which had never before intruded into hergentle life.

“It's you!” said he, mopping his brow. “And to think that you should cometo me, heart of my heart, and I should find nothing better to do than towant to strangle you! Come then, darling,” and he held out his arms, “letme make it up to you.”

But she had not recovered from that sudden glimpse of guilty fear whichshe had read in the man's face. All her woman's instinct told her that itwas not the mere fright of a man who is startled. Guilt—that was it—guiltand fear!

“What's come over you, Jack?” she cried. “Why were you so scared of me?Oh, Jack, if your conscience was at ease, you would not have looked at melike that!”

“Sure, I was thinking of other things, and when you came tripping solightly on those fairy feet of yours—”

“No, no, it was more than that, Jack.” Then a sudden suspicion seized her.“Let me see that letter you were writing.”

“Ah, Ettie, I couldn't do that.”

Her suspicions became certainties. “It's to another woman,” she cried. “Iknow it! Why else should you hold it from me? Was it to your wife that youwere writing? How am I to know that you are not a married man—you, astranger, that nobody knows?”

“I am not married, Ettie. See now, I swear it! You're the only one womanon earth to me. By the cross of Christ I swear it!”

He was so white with passionate earnestness that she could not but believehim.

“Well, then,” she cried, “why will you not show me the letter?”

“I'll tell you, acushla,” said he. “I'm under oath not to show it, andjust as I wouldn't break my word to you so I would keep it to those whohold my promise. It's the business of the lodge, and even to you it'ssecret. And if I was scared when a hand fell on me, can't you understandit when it might have been the hand of a detective?”

She felt that he was telling the truth. He gathered her into his arms andkissed away her fears and doubts.

“Sit here by me, then. It's a queer throne for such a queen; but it's thebest your poor lover can find. He'll do better for you some of these days,I'm thinking. Now your mind is easy once again, is it not?”

“How can it ever be at ease, Jack, when I know that you are a criminalamong criminals, when I never know the day that I may hear you are incourt for murder? 'McMurdo the Scowrer,' that's what one of our boarderscalled you yesterday. It went through my heart like a knife.”

“Sure, hard words break no bones.”

“But they were true.”

“Well, dear, it's not so bad as you think. We are but poor men that aretrying in our own way to get our rights.”

Ettie threw her arms round her lover's neck. “Give it up, Jack! For mysake, for God's sake, give it up! It was to ask you that I came hereto-day. Oh, Jack, see—I beg it of you on my bended knees! Kneelinghere before you I implore you to give it up!”

He raised her and soothed her with her head against his breast.

“Sure, my darlin', you don't know what it is you are asking. How could Igive it up when it would be to break my oath and to desert my comrades? Ifyou could see how things stand with me you could never ask it of me.Besides, if I wanted to, how could I do it? You don't suppose that thelodge would let a man go free with all its secrets?”

“I've thought of that, Jack. I've planned it all. Father has saved somemoney. He is weary of this place where the fear of these people darkensour lives. He is ready to go. We would fly together to Philadelphia or NewYork, where we would be safe from them.”

McMurdo laughed. “The lodge has a long arm. Do you think it could notstretch from here to Philadelphia or New York?”

“Well, then, to the West, or to England, or to Germany, where father camefrom—anywhere to get away from this Valley of Fear!”

McMurdo thought of old Brother Morris. “Sure, it is the second time I haveheard the valley so named,” said he. “The shadow does indeed seem to lieheavy on some of you.”

“It darkens every moment of our lives. Do you suppose that Ted Baldwin hasever forgiven us? If it were not that he fears you, what do you supposeour chances would be? If you saw the look in those dark, hungry eyes ofhis when they fall on me!”

“By Gar! I'd teach him better manners if I caught him at it! But see here,little girl. I can't leave here. I can't—take that from me once andfor all. But if you will leave me to find my own way, I will try toprepare a way of getting honourably out of it.”

“There is no honour in such a matter.”

“Well, well, it's just how you look at it. But if you'll give me sixmonths, I'll work it so that I can leave without being ashamed to lookothers in the face.”

The girl laughed with joy. “Six months!” she cried. “Is it a promise?”

“Well, it may be seven or eight. But within a year at the furthest we willleave the valley behind us.”

It was the most that Ettie could obtain, and yet it was something. Therewas this distant light to illuminate the gloom of the immediate future.She returned to her father's house more light-hearted than she had everbeen since Jack McMurdo had come into her life.

It might be thought that as a member, all the doings of the society wouldbe told to him; but he was soon to discover that the organization waswider and more complex than the simple lodge. Even Boss McGinty wasignorant as to many things; for there was an official named the CountyDelegate, living at Hobson's Patch farther down the line, who had powerover several different lodges which he wielded in a sudden and arbitraryway. Only once did McMurdo see him, a sly, little gray-haired rat of aman, with a slinking gait and a sidelong glance which was charged withmalice. Evans Pott was his name, and even the great Boss of Vermissa felttowards him something of the repulsion and fear which the huge Danton mayhave felt for the puny but dangerous Robespierre.

One day Scanlan, who was McMurdo's fellow boarder, received a note fromMcGinty inclosing one from Evans Pott, which informed him that he wassending over two good men, Lawler and Andrews, who had instructions to actin the neighbourhood; though it was best for the cause that no particularsas to their objects should be given. Would the Bodymaster see to it thatsuitable arrangements be made for their lodgings and comfort until thetime for action should arrive? McGinty added that it was impossible foranyone to remain secret at the Union House, and that, therefore, he wouldbe obliged if McMurdo and Scanlan would put the strangers up for a fewdays in their boarding house.

The same evening the two men arrived, each carrying his gripsack. Lawlerwas an elderly man, shrewd, silent, and self-contained, clad in an oldblack frock coat, which with his soft felt hat and ragged, grizzled beardgave him a general resemblance to an itinerant preacher. His companionAndrews was little more than a boy, frank-faced and cheerful, with thebreezy manner of one who is out for a holiday and means to enjoy everyminute of it. Both men were total abstainers, and behaved in all ways asexemplary members of the society, with the one simple exception that theywere assassins who had often proved themselves to be most capableinstruments for this association of murder. Lawler had already carried outfourteen commissions of the kind, and Andrews three.

They were, as McMurdo found, quite ready to converse about their deeds inthe past, which they recounted with the half-bashful pride of men who haddone good and unselfish service for the community. They were reticent,however, as to the immediate job in hand.

“They chose us because neither I nor the boy here drink,” Lawlerexplained. “They can count on us saying no more than we should. You mustnot take it amiss, but it is the orders of the County Delegate that weobey.”

“Sure, we are all in it together,” said Scanlan, McMurdo's mate, as thefour sat together at supper.

“That's true enough, and we'll talk till the cows come home of the killingof Charlie Williams or of Simon Bird, or any other job in the past. Buttill the work is done we say nothing.”

“There are half a dozen about here that I have a word to say to,” saidMcMurdo, with an oath. “I suppose it isn't Jack Knox of Ironhill that youare after. I'd go some way to see him get his deserts.”

“No, it's not him yet.”

“Or Herman Strauss?”

“No, nor him either.”

“Well, if you won't tell us we can't make you; but I'd be glad to know.”

Lawler smiled and shook his head. He was not to be drawn.

In spite of the reticence of their guests, Scanlan and McMurdo were quitedetermined to be present at what they called “the fun.” When, therefore,at an early hour one morning McMurdo heard them creeping down the stairshe awakened Scanlan, and the two hurried on their clothes. When they weredressed they found that the others had stolen out, leaving the door openbehind them. It was not yet dawn, and by the light of the lamps they couldsee the two men some distance down the street. They followed them warily,treading noiselessly in the deep snow.

The boarding house was near the edge of the town, and soon they were atthe crossroads which is beyond its boundary. Here three men were waiting,with whom Lawler and Andrews held a short, eager conversation. Then theyall moved on together. It was clearly some notable job which needednumbers. At this point there are several trails which lead to variousmines. The strangers took that which led to the Crow Hill, a huge businesswhich was in strong hands which had been able, thanks to their energeticand fearless New England manager, Josiah H. Dunn, to keep some order anddiscipline during the long reign of terror.

Day was breaking now, and a line of workmen were slowly making their way,singly and in groups, along the blackened path.

McMurdo and Scanlan strolled on with the others, keeping in sight of themen whom they followed. A thick mist lay over them, and from the heart ofit there came the sudden scream of a steam whistle. It was the ten-minutesignal before the cages descended and the day's labour began.

When they reached the open space round the mine shaft there were a hundredminers waiting, stamping their feet and blowing on their fingers; for itwas bitterly cold. The strangers stood in a little group under the shadowof the engine house. Scanlan and McMurdo climbed a heap of slag from whichthe whole scene lay before them. They saw the mine engineer, a greatbearded Scotchman named Menzies, come out of the engine house and blow hiswhistle for the cages to be lowered.

At the same instant a tall, loose-framed young man with a clean-shaved,earnest face advanced eagerly towards the pit head. As he came forward hiseyes fell upon the group, silent and motionless, under the engine house.The men had drawn down their hats and turned up their collars to screentheir faces. For a moment the presentiment of Death laid its cold handupon the manager's heart. At the next he had shaken it off and saw onlyhis duty towards intrusive strangers.

“Who are you?” he asked as he advanced. “What are you loitering therefor?”

There was no answer; but the lad Andrews stepped forward and shot him inthe stomach. The hundred waiting miners stood as motionless and helplessas if they were paralyzed. The manager clapped his two hands to the woundand doubled himself up. Then he staggered away; but another of theassassins fired, and he went down sidewise, kicking and clawing among aheap of clinkers. Menzies, the Scotchman, gave a roar of rage at the sightand rushed with an iron spanner at the murderers; but was met by two ballsin the face which dropped him dead at their very feet.

There was a surge forward of some of the miners, and an inarticulate cryof pity and of anger; but a couple of the strangers emptied theirsix-shooters over the heads of the crowd, and they broke and scattered,some of them rushing wildly back to their homes in Vermissa.

When a few of the bravest had rallied, and there was a return to the mine,the murderous gang had vanished in the mists of morning, without a singlewitness being able to swear to the identity of these men who in front of ahundred spectators had wrought this double crime.

Scanlan and McMurdo made their way back; Scanlan somewhat subdued, for itwas the first murder job that he had seen with his own eyes, and itappeared less funny than he had been led to believe. The horrible screamsof the dead manager's wife pursued them as they hurried to the town.McMurdo was absorbed and silent; but he showed no sympathy for theweakening of his companion.

“Sure, it is like a war,” he repeated. “What is it but a war between usand them, and we hit back where we best can.”

There was high revel in the lodge room at the Union House that night, notonly over the killing of the manager and engineer of the Crow Hill mine,which would bring this organization into line with the other blackmailedand terror-stricken companies of the district, but also over a distanttriumph which had been wrought by the hands of the lodge itself.

It would appear that when the County Delegate had sent over five good mento strike a blow in Vermissa, he had demanded that in return threeVermissa men should be secretly selected and sent across to kill WilliamHales of Stake Royal, one of the best known and most popular mine ownersin the Gilmerton district, a man who was believed not to have an enemy inthe world; for he was in all ways a model employer. He had insisted,however, upon efficiency in the work, and had, therefore, paid off certaindrunken and idle employees who were members of the all-powerful society.Coffin notices hung outside his door had not weakened his resolution, andso in a free, civilized country he found himself condemned to death.

The execution had now been duly carried out. Ted Baldwin, who sprawled nowin the seat of honour beside the Bodymaster, had been chief of the party.His flushed face and glazed, bloodshot eyes told of sleeplessness anddrink. He and his two comrades had spent the night before among themountains. They were unkempt and weather-stained. But no heroes, returningfrom a forlorn hope, could have had a warmer welcome from their comrades.

The story was told and retold amid cries of delight and shouts oflaughter. They had waited for their man as he drove home at nightfall,taking their station at the top of a steep hill, where his horse must beat a walk. He was so furred to keep out the cold that he could not lay hishand on his pistol. They had pulled him out and shot him again and again.He had screamed for mercy. The screams were repeated for the amusement ofthe lodge.

“Let's hear again how he squealed,” they cried.

None of them knew the man; but there is eternal drama in a killing, andthey had shown the Scowrers of Gilmerton that the Vermissa men were to berelied upon.

There had been one contretemps; for a man and his wife had driven up whilethey were still emptying their revolvers into the silent body. It had beensuggested that they should shoot them both; but they were harmless folkwho were not connected with the mines, so they were sternly bidden todrive on and keep silent, lest a worse thing befall them. And so theblood-mottled figure had been left as a warning to all such hard-heartedemployers, and the three noble avengers had hurried off into the mountainswhere unbroken nature comes down to the very edge of the furnaces and theslag heaps. Here they were, safe and sound, their work well done, and theplaudits of their companions in their ears.

It had been a great day for the Scowrers. The shadow had fallen evendarker over the valley. But as the wise general chooses the moment ofvictory in which to redouble his efforts, so that his foes may have notime to steady themselves after disaster, so Boss McGinty, looking outupon the scene of his operations with his brooding and malicious eyes, haddevised a new attack upon those who opposed him. That very night, as thehalf-drunken company broke up, he touched McMurdo on the arm and led himaside into that inner room where they had their first interview.

“See here, my lad,” said he, “I've got a job that's worthy of you at last.You'll have the doing of it in your own hands.”

“Proud I am to hear it,” McMurdo answered.

“You can take two men with you—Manders and Reilly. They have beenwarned for service. We'll never be right in this district until ChesterWilcox has been settled, and you'll have the thanks of every lodge in thecoal fields if you can down him.”

“I'll do my best, anyhow. Who is he, and where shall I find him?”

McGinty took his eternal half-chewed, half-smoked cigar from the corner ofhis mouth, and proceeded to draw a rough diagram on a page torn from hisnotebook.

“He's the chief foreman of the Iron Dike Company. He's a hard citizen, anold colour sergeant of the war, all scars and grizzle. We've had two triesat him; but had no luck, and Jim Carnaway lost his life over it. Now it'sfor you to take it over. That's the house—all alone at the Iron Dikecrossroad, same as you see here on the map—without another withinearshot. It's no good by day. He's armed and shoots quick and straight,with no questions asked. But at night—well, there he is with hiswife, three children, and a hired help. You can't pick or choose. It's allor none. If you could get a bag of blasting powder at the front door witha slow match to it—”

“What's the man done?”

“Didn't I tell you he shot Jim Carnaway?”

“Why did he shoot him?”

“What in thunder has that to do with you? Carnaway was about his house atnight, and he shot him. That's enough for me and you. You've got to settlethe thing right.”

“There's these two women and the children. Do they go up too?”

“They have to—else how can we get him?”

“It seems hard on them; for they've done nothing.”

“What sort of fool's talk is this? Do you back out?”

“Easy, Councillor, easy! What have I ever said or done that you shouldthink I would be after standing back from an order of the Bodymaster of myown lodge? If it's right or if it's wrong, it's for you to decide.”

“You'll do it, then?”

“Of course I will do it.”

“When?”

“Well, you had best give me a night or two that I may see the house andmake my plans. Then—”

“Very good,” said McGinty, shaking him by the hand. “I leave it with you.It will be a great day when you bring us the news. It's just the laststroke that will bring them all to their knees.”

McMurdo thought long and deeply over the commission which had been sosuddenly placed in his hands. The isolated house in which Chester Wilcoxlived was about five miles off in an adjacent valley. That very night hestarted off all alone to prepare for the attempt. It was daylight beforehe returned from his reconnaissance. Next day he interviewed his twosubordinates, Manders and Reilly, reckless youngsters who were as elatedas if it were a deer-hunt.

Two nights later they met outside the town, all three armed, and one ofthem carrying a sack stuffed with the powder which was used in thequarries. It was two in the morning before they came to the lonely house.The night was a windy one, with broken clouds drifting swiftly across theface of a three-quarter moon. They had been warned to be on their guardagainst bloodhounds; so they moved forward cautiously, with their pistolscocked in their hands. But there was no sound save the howling of thewind, and no movement but the swaying branches above them.

McMurdo listened at the door of the lonely house; but all was stillwithin. Then he leaned the powder bag against it, ripped a hole in it withhis knife, and attached the fuse. When it was well alight he and his twocompanions took to their heels, and were some distance off, safe and snugin a sheltering ditch, before the shattering roar of the explosion, withthe low, deep rumble of the collapsing building, told them that their workwas done. No cleaner job had ever been carried out in the bloodstainedannals of the society.

But alas that work so well organized and boldly carried out should allhave gone for nothing! Warned by the fate of the various victims, andknowing that he was marked down for destruction, Chester Wilcox had movedhimself and his family only the day before to some safer and less knownquarters, where a guard of police should watch over them. It was an emptyhouse which had been torn down by the gunpowder, and the grim old coloursergeant of the war was still teaching discipline to the miners of IronDike.

“Leave him to me,” said McMurdo. “He's my man, and I'll get him sure if Ihave to wait a year for him.”

A vote of thanks and confidence was passed in full lodge, and so for thetime the matter ended. When a few weeks later it was reported in thepapers that Wilcox had been shot at from an ambuscade, it was an opensecret that McMurdo was still at work upon his unfinished job.

Such were the methods of the Society of Freemen, and such were the deedsof the Scowrers by which they spread their rule of fear over the great andrich district which was for so long a period haunted by their terriblepresence. Why should these pages be stained by further crimes? Have I notsaid enough to show the men and their methods?

These deeds are written in history, and there are records wherein one mayread the details of them. There one may learn of the shooting of PolicemenHunt and Evans because they had ventured to arrest two members of thesociety—a double outrage planned at the Vermissa lodge and carriedout in cold blood upon two helpless and disarmed men. There also one mayread of the shooting of Mrs. Larbey when she was nursing her husband, whohad been beaten almost to death by orders of Boss McGinty. The killing ofthe elder Jenkins, shortly followed by that of his brother, the mutilationof James Murdoch, the blowing up of the Staphouse family, and the murderof the Stendals all followed hard upon one another in the same terriblewinter.

Darkly the shadow lay upon the Valley of Fear. The spring had come withrunning brooks and blossoming trees. There was hope for all Nature boundso long in an iron grip; but nowhere was there any hope for the men andwomen who lived under the yoke of the terror. Never had the cloud abovethem been so dark and hopeless as in the early summer of the year 1875.

Chapter 6 — Danger

It was the height of the reign of terror. McMurdo, who had already beenappointed Inner Deacon, with every prospect of some day succeeding McGintyas Bodymaster, was now so necessary to the councils of his comrades thatnothing was done without his help and advice. The more popular he became,however, with the Freemen, the blacker were the scowls which greeted himas he passed along the streets of Vermissa. In spite of their terror thecitizens were taking heart to band themselves together against theiroppressors. Rumours had reached the lodge of secret gatherings in theHerald office and of distribution of firearms among the law-abidingpeople. But McGinty and his men were undisturbed by such reports. Theywere numerous, resolute, and well armed. Their opponents were scatteredand powerless. It would all end, as it had done in the past, in aimlesstalk and possibly in impotent arrests. So said McGinty, McMurdo, and allthe bolder spirits.

It was a Saturday evening in May. Saturday was always the lodge night, andMcMurdo was leaving his house to attend it when Morris, the weaker brotherof the order, came to see him. His brow was creased with care, and hiskindly face was drawn and haggard.

“Can I speak with you freely, Mr. McMurdo?”

“Sure.”

“I can't forget that I spoke my heart to you once, and that you kept it toyourself, even though the Boss himself came to ask you about it.”

“What else could I do if you trusted me? It wasn't that I agreed with whatyou said.”

“I know that well. But you are the one that I can speak to and be safe.I've a secret here,” he put his hand to his breast, “and it is justburning the life out of me. I wish it had come to any one of you but me.If I tell it, it will mean murder, for sure. If I don't, it may bring theend of us all. God help me, but I am near out of my wits over it!”

McMurdo looked at the man earnestly. He was trembling in every limb. Hepoured some whisky into a glass and handed it to him. “That's the physicfor the likes of you,” said he. “Now let me hear of it.”

Morris drank, and his white face took a tinge of colour. “I can tell it toyou all in one sentence,” said he. “There's a detective on our trail.”

McMurdo stared at him in astonishment. “Why, man, you're crazy,” he said.“Isn't the place full of police and detectives and what harm did they everdo us?”

“No, no, it's no man of the district. As you say, we know them, and it islittle that they can do. But you've heard of Pinkerton's?”

“I've read of some folk of that name.”

“Well, you can take it from me you've no show when they are on your trail.It's not a take-it-or-miss-it government concern. It's a dead earnestbusiness proposition that's out for results and keeps out till by hook orcrook it gets them. If a Pinkerton man is deep in this business, we areall destroyed.”

“We must kill him.”

“Ah, it's the first thought that came to you! So it will be up at thelodge. Didn't I say to you that it would end in murder?”

“Sure, what is murder? Isn't it common enough in these parts?”

“It is, indeed; but it's not for me to point out the man that is to bemurdered. I'd never rest easy again. And yet it's our own necks that maybe at stake. In God's name what shall I do?” He rocked to and fro in hisagony of indecision.

But his words had moved McMurdo deeply. It was easy to see that he sharedthe other's opinion as to the danger, and the need for meeting it. Hegripped Morris's shoulder and shook him in his earnestness.

“See here, man,” he cried, and he almost screeched the words in hisexcitement, “you won't gain anything by sitting keening like an old wifeat a wake. Let's have the facts. Who is the fellow? Where is he? How didyou hear of him? Why did you come to me?”

“I came to you; for you are the one man that would advise me. I told youthat I had a store in the East before I came here. I left good friendsbehind me, and one of them is in the telegraph service. Here's a letterthat I had from him yesterday. It's this part from the top of the page.You can read it yourself.”

This was what McMurdo read:

How are the Scowrers getting on in your parts? We read plenty of them inthe papers. Between you and me I expect to hear news from you before long.Five big corporations and the two railroads have taken the thing up indead earnest. They mean it, and you can bet they'll get there! They areright deep down into it. Pinkerton has taken hold under their orders, andhis best man, Birdy Edwards, is operating. The thing has got to be stoppedright now.

“Now read the postscript.”

Of course, what I give you is what I learned in business; so it goes nofurther. It's a queer cipher that you handle by the yard every day and canget no meaning from.

McMurdo sat in silence for some time, with the letter in his listlesshands. The mist had lifted for a moment, and there was the abyss beforehim.

“Does anyone else know of this?” he asked.

“I have told no one else.”

“But this man—your friend—has he any other person that hewould be likely to write to?”

“Well, I dare say he knows one or two more.”

“Of the lodge?”

“It's likely enough.”

“I was asking because it is likely that he may have given some descriptionof this fellow Birdy Edwards—then we could get on his trail.”

“Well, it's possible. But I should not think he knew him. He is justtelling me the news that came to him by way of business. How would he knowthis Pinkerton man?”

McMurdo gave a violent start.

“By Gar!” he cried, “I've got him. What a fool I was not to know it. Lord!but we're in luck! We will fix him before he can do any harm. See here,Morris, will you leave this thing in my hands?”

“Sure, if you will only take it off mine.”

“I'll do that. You can stand right back and let me run it. Even your nameneed not be mentioned. I'll take it all on myself, as if it were to methat this letter has come. Will that content you?”

“It's just what I would ask.”

“Then leave it at that and keep your head shut. Now I'll get down to thelodge, and we'll soon make old man Pinkerton sorry for himself.”

“You wouldn't kill this man?”

“The less you know, Friend Morris, the easier your conscience will be, andthe better you will sleep. Ask no questions, and let these things settlethemselves. I have hold of it now.”

Morris shook his head sadly as he left. “I feel that his blood is on myhands,” he groaned.

“Self-protection is no murder, anyhow,” said McMurdo, smiling grimly.“It's him or us. I guess this man would destroy us all if we left him longin the valley. Why, Brother Morris, we'll have to elect you Bodymasteryet; for you've surely saved the lodge.”

And yet it was clear from his actions that he thought more seriously ofthis new intrusion than his words would show. It may have been his guiltyconscience, it may have been the reputation of the Pinkerton organization,it may have been the knowledge that great, rich corporations had setthemselves the task of clearing out the Scowrers; but, whatever hisreason, his actions were those of a man who is preparing for the worst.Every paper which would incriminate him was destroyed before he left thehouse. After that he gave a long sigh of satisfaction; for it seemed tohim that he was safe. And yet the danger must still have pressed somewhatupon him; for on his way to the lodge he stopped at old man Shafter's. Thehouse was forbidden him; but when he tapped at the window Ettie came outto him. The dancing Irish deviltry had gone from her lover's eyes. Sheread his danger in his earnest face.

“Something has happened!” she cried. “Oh, Jack, you are in danger!”

“Sure, it is not very bad, my sweetheart. And yet it may be wise that wemake a move before it is worse.”

“Make a move?”

“I promised you once that I would go some day. I think the time is coming.I had news to-night, bad news, and I see trouble coming.”

“The police?”

“Well, a Pinkerton. But, sure, you wouldn't know what that is, acushla,nor what it may mean to the likes of me. I'm too deep in this thing, and Imay have to get out of it quick. You said you would come with me if Iwent.”

“Oh, Jack, it would be the saving of you!”

“I'm an honest man in some things, Ettie. I wouldn't hurt a hair of yourbonny head for all that the world can give, nor ever pull you down oneinch from the golden throne above the clouds where I always see you. Wouldyou trust me?”

She put her hand in his without a word. “Well, then, listen to what I say,and do as I order you, for indeed it's the only way for us. Things aregoing to happen in this valley. I feel it in my bones. There may be manyof us that will have to look out for ourselves. I'm one, anyhow. If I go,by day or night, it's you that must come with me!”

“I'd come after you, Jack.”

“No, no, you shall come WITH me. If this valley is closed to me and I cannever come back, how can I leave you behind, and me perhaps in hiding fromthe police with never a chance of a message? It's with me you must come. Iknow a good woman in the place I come from, and it's there I'd leave youtill we can get married. Will you come?”

“Yes, Jack, I will come.”

“God bless you for your trust in me! It's a fiend out of hell that Ishould be if I abused it. Now, mark you, Ettie, it will be just a word toyou, and when it reaches you, you will drop everything and come right downto the waiting room at the depot and stay there till I come for you.”

“Day or night, I'll come at the word, Jack.”

Somewhat eased in mind, now that his own preparations for escape had beenbegun, McMurdo went on to the lodge. It had already assembled, and only bycomplicated signs and countersigns could he pass through the outer guardand inner guard who close-tiled it. A buzz of pleasure and welcome greetedhim as he entered. The long room was crowded, and through the haze oftobacco smoke he saw the tangled black mane of the Bodymaster, the cruel,unfriendly features of Baldwin, the vulture face of Harraway, thesecretary, and a dozen more who were among the leaders of the lodge. Herejoiced that they should all be there to take counsel over his news.

“Indeed, it's glad we are to see you, Brother!” cried the chairman.“There's business here that wants a Solomon in judgment to set it right.”

“It's Lander and Egan,” explained his neighbour as he took his seat. “Theyboth claim the head money given by the lodge for the shooting of old manCrabbe over at Stylestown, and who's to say which fired the bullet?”

McMurdo rose in his place and raised his hand. The expression of his facefroze the attention of the audience. There was a dead hush of expectation.

“Eminent Bodymaster,” he said, in a solemn voice, “I claim urgency!”

“Brother McMurdo claims urgency,” said McGinty. “It's a claim that by therules of this lodge takes precedence. Now Brother, we attend you.”

McMurdo took the letter from his pocket.

“Eminent Bodymaster and Brethren,” he said, “I am the bearer of ill newsthis day; but it is better that it should be known and discussed, thanthat a blow should fall upon us without warning which would destroy usall. I have information that the most powerful and richest organizationsin this state have bound themselves together for our destruction, and thatat this very moment there is a Pinkerton detective, one Birdy Edwards, atwork in the valley collecting the evidence which may put a rope round thenecks of many of us, and send every man in this room into a felon's cell.That is the situation for the discussion of which I have made a claim ofurgency.”

There was a dead silence in the room. It was broken by the chairman.

“What is your evidence for this, Brother McMurdo?” he asked.

“It is in this letter which has come into my hands,” said McMurdo. He readthe passage aloud. “It is a matter of honour with me that I can give nofurther particulars about the letter, nor put it into your hands; but Iassure you that there is nothing else in it which can affect the interestsof the lodge. I put the case before you as it has reached me.”

“Let me say, Mr. Chairman,” said one of the older brethren, “that I haveheard of Birdy Edwards, and that he has the name of being the best man inthe Pinkerton service.”

“Does anyone know him by sight?” asked McGinty.

“Yes,” said McMurdo, “I do.”

There was a murmur of astonishment through the hall.

“I believe we hold him in the hollow of our hands,” he continued with anexulting smile upon his face. “If we act quickly and wisely, we can cutthis thing short. If I have your confidence and your help, it is littlethat we have to fear.”

“What have we to fear, anyhow? What can he know of our affairs?”

“You might say so if all were as stanch as you, Councillor. But this manhas all the millions of the capitalists at his back. Do you think there isno weaker brother among all our lodges that could not be bought? He willget at our secrets—maybe has got them already. There's only one surecure.”

“That he never leaves the valley,” said Baldwin.

McMurdo nodded. “Good for you, Brother Baldwin,” he said. “You and I havehad our differences, but you have said the true word to-night.”

“Where is he, then? Where shall we know him?”

“Eminent Bodymaster,” said McMurdo, earnestly, “I would put it to you thatthis is too vital a thing for us to discuss in open lodge. God forbid thatI should throw a doubt on anyone here; but if so much as a word of gossipgot to the ears of this man, there would be an end of any chance of ourgetting him. I would ask the lodge to choose a trusty committee, Mr.Chairman—yourself, if I might suggest it, and Brother Baldwin here,and five more. Then I can talk freely of what I know and of what I adviseshould be done.”

The proposition was at once adopted, and the committee chosen. Besides thechairman and Baldwin there were the vulture-faced secretary, Harraway,Tiger Cormac, the brutal young assassin, Carter, the treasurer, and thebrothers Willaby, fearless and desperate men who would stick at nothing.

The usual revelry of the lodge was short and subdued: for there was acloud upon the men's spirits, and many there for the first time began tosee the cloud of avenging Law drifting up in that serene sky under whichthey had dwelt so long. The horrors they had dealt out to others had beenso much a part of their settled lives that the thought of retribution hadbecome a remote one, and so seemed the more startling now that it came soclosely upon them. They broke up early and left their leaders to theircouncil.

“Now, McMurdo!” said McGinty when they were alone. The seven men satfrozen in their seats.

“I said just now that I knew Birdy Edwards,” McMurdo explained. “I neednot tell you that he is not here under that name. He's a brave man, butnot a crazy one. He passes under the name of Steve Wilson, and he islodging at Hobson's Patch.”

“How do you know this?”

“Because I fell into talk with him. I thought little of it at the time,nor would have given it a second thought but for this letter; but now I'msure it's the man. I met him on the cars when I went down the line onWednesday—a hard case if ever there was one. He said he was areporter. I believed it for the moment. Wanted to know all he could aboutthe Scowrers and what he called 'the outrages' for a New York paper. Askedme every kind of question so as to get something. You bet I was givingnothing away. 'I'd pay for it and pay well,' said he, 'if I could get somestuff that would suit my editor.' I said what I thought would please himbest, and he handed me a twenty-dollar bill for my information. 'There'sten times that for you,' said he, 'if you can find me all that I want.'”

“What did you tell him, then?”

“Any stuff I could make up.”

“How do you know he wasn't a newspaper man?”

“I'll tell you. He got out at Hobson's Patch, and so did I. I chanced intothe telegraph bureau, and he was leaving it.

“'See here,' said the operator after he'd gone out, 'I guess we shouldcharge double rates for this.'—'I guess you should,' said I. He hadfilled the form with stuff that might have been Chinese, for all we couldmake of it. 'He fires a sheet of this off every day,' said the clerk.'Yes,' said I; 'it's special news for his paper, and he's scared that theothers should tap it.' That was what the operator thought and what Ithought at the time; but I think differently now.”

“By Gar! I believe you are right,” said McGinty. “But what do you allowthat we should do about it?”

“Why not go right down now and fix him?” someone suggested.

“Ay, the sooner the better.”

“I'd start this next minute if I knew where we could find him,” saidMcMurdo. “He's in Hobson's Patch; but I don't know the house. I've got aplan, though, if you'll only take my advice.”

“Well, what is it?”

“I'll go to the Patch to-morrow morning. I'll find him through theoperator. He can locate him, I guess. Well, then I'll tell him that I'm aFreeman myself. I'll offer him all the secrets of the lodge for a price.You bet he'll tumble to it. I'll tell him the papers are at my house, andthat it's as much as my life would be worth to let him come while folkwere about. He'll see that that's horse sense. Let him come at ten o'clockat night, and he shall see everything. That will fetch him sure.”

“Well?”

“You can plan the rest for yourselves. Widow MacNamara's is a lonelyhouse. She's as true as steel and as deaf as a post. There's only Scanlanand me in the house. If I get his promise—and I'll let you know if Ido—I'd have the whole seven of you come to me by nine o'clock. We'llget him in. If ever he gets out alive—well, he can talk of BirdyEdwards's luck for the rest of his days!”

“There's going to be a vacancy at Pinkerton's or I'm mistaken. Leave it atthat, McMurdo. At nine to-morrow we'll be with you. You once get the doorshut behind him, and you can leave the rest with us.”

Chapter 7 — The Trapping of Birdy Edwards

As McMurdo had said, the house in which he lived was a lonely one and verywell suited for such a crime as they had planned. It was on the extremefringe of the town and stood well back from the road. In any other casethe conspirators would have simply called out their man, as they had manya time before, and emptied their pistols into his body; but in thisinstance it was very necessary to find out how much he knew, how he knewit, and what had been passed on to his employers.

It was possible that they were already too late and that the work had beendone. If that was indeed so, they could at least have their revenge uponthe man who had done it. But they were hopeful that nothing of greatimportance had yet come to the detective's knowledge, as otherwise, theyargued, he would not have troubled to write down and forward such trivialinformation as McMurdo claimed to have given him. However, all this theywould learn from his own lips. Once in their power, they would find a wayto make him speak. It was not the first time that they had handled anunwilling witness.

McMurdo went to Hobson's Patch as agreed. The police seemed to takeparticular interest in him that morning, and Captain Marvin—he whohad claimed the old acquaintance with him at Chicago—actuallyaddressed him as he waited at the station. McMurdo turned away and refusedto speak with him. He was back from his mission in the afternoon, and sawMcGinty at the Union House.

“He is coming,” he said.

“Good!” said McGinty. The giant was in his shirt sleeves, with chains andseals gleaming athwart his ample waistcoat and a diamond twinkling throughthe fringe of his bristling beard. Drink and politics had made the Boss avery rich as well as powerful man. The more terrible, therefore, seemedthat glimpse of the prison or the gallows which had risen before him thenight before.

“Do you reckon he knows much?” he asked anxiously.

McMurdo shook his head gloomily. “He's been here some time—six weeksat the least. I guess he didn't come into these parts to look at theprospect. If he has been working among us all that time with the railroadmoney at his back, I should expect that he has got results, and that hehas passed them on.”

“There's not a weak man in the lodge,” cried McGinty. “True as steel,every man of them. And yet, by the Lord! there is that skunk Morris. Whatabout him? If any man gives us away, it would be he. I've a mind to send acouple of the boys round before evening to give him a beating up and seewhat they can get from him.”

“Well, there would be no harm in that,” McMurdo answered. “I won't denythat I have a liking for Morris and would be sorry to see him come toharm. He has spoken to me once or twice over lodge matters, and though hemay not see them the same as you or I, he never seemed the sort thatsqueals. But still it is not for me to stand between him and you.”

“I'll fix the old devil!” said McGinty with an oath. “I've had my eye onhim this year past.”

“Well, you know best about that,” McMurdo answered. “But whatever you domust be to-morrow; for we must lie low until the Pinkerton affair issettled up. We can't afford to set the police buzzing, to-day of alldays.”

“True for you,” said McGinty. “And we'll learn from Birdy Edwards himselfwhere he got his news if we have to cut his heart out first. Did he seemto scent a trap?”

McMurdo laughed. “I guess I took him on his weak point,” he said. “If hecould get on a good trail of the Scowrers, he's ready to follow it intohell. I took his money,” McMurdo grinned as he produced a wad of dollarnotes, “and as much more when he has seen all my papers.”

“What papers?”

“Well, there are no papers. But I filled him up about constitutions andbooks of rules and forms of membership. He expects to get right down tothe end of everything before he leaves.”

“Faith, he's right there,” said McGinty grimly. “Didn't he ask you why youdidn't bring him the papers?”

“As if I would carry such things, and me a suspected man, and CaptainMarvin after speaking to me this very day at the depot!”

“Ay, I heard of that,” said McGinty. “I guess the heavy end of thisbusiness is coming on to you. We could put him down an old shaft whenwe've done with him; but however we work it we can't get past the manliving at Hobson's Patch and you being there to-day.”

McMurdo shrugged his shoulders. “If we handle it right, they can neverprove the killing,” said he. “No one can see him come to the house afterdark, and I'll lay to it that no one will see him go. Now see here,Councillor, I'll show you my plan and I'll ask you to fit the others intoit. You will all come in good time. Very well. He comes at ten. He is totap three times, and me to open the door for him. Then I'll get behind himand shut it. He's our man then.”

“That's all easy and plain.”

“Yes; but the next step wants considering. He's a hard proposition. He'sheavily armed. I've fooled him proper, and yet he is likely to be on hisguard. Suppose I show him right into a room with seven men in it where heexpected to find me alone. There is going to be shooting, and somebody isgoing to be hurt.”

“That's so.”

“And the noise is going to bring every damned copper in the township ontop of it.”

“I guess you are right.”

“This is how I should work it. You will all be in the big room—sameas you saw when you had a chat with me. I'll open the door for him, showhim into the parlour beside the door, and leave him there while I get thepapers. That will give me the chance of telling you how things areshaping. Then I will go back to him with some faked papers. As he isreading them I will jump for him and get my grip on his pistol arm. You'llhear me call and in you will rush. The quicker the better; for he is asstrong a man as I, and I may have more than I can manage. But I allow thatI can hold him till you come.”

“It's a good plan,” said McGinty. “The lodge will owe you a debt for this.I guess when I move out of the chair I can put a name to the man that'scoming after me.”

“Sure, Councillor, I am little more than a recruit,” said McMurdo; but hisface showed what he thought of the great man's compliment.

When he had returned home he made his own preparations for the grimevening in front of him. First he cleaned, oiled, and loaded his Smith&amp; Wesson revolver. Then he surveyed the room in which the detectivewas to be trapped. It was a large apartment, with a long deal table in thecentre, and the big stove at one side. At each of the other sides werewindows. There were no shutters on these: only light curtains which drewacross. McMurdo examined these attentively. No doubt it must have struckhim that the apartment was very exposed for so secret a meeting. Yet itsdistance from the road made it of less consequence. Finally he discussedthe matter with his fellow lodger. Scanlan, though a Scowrer, was aninoffensive little man who was too weak to stand against the opinion ofhis comrades, but was secretly horrified by the deeds of blood at which hehad sometimes been forced to assist. McMurdo told him shortly what wasintended.

“And if I were you, Mike Scanlan, I would take a night off and keep clearof it. There will be bloody work here before morning.”

“Well, indeed then, Mac,” Scanlan answered. “It's not the will but thenerve that is wanting in me. When I saw Manager Dunn go down at thecolliery yonder it was just more than I could stand. I'm not made for it,same as you or McGinty. If the lodge will think none the worse of me, I'lljust do as you advise and leave you to yourselves for the evening.”

The men came in good time as arranged. They were outwardly respectablecitizens, well clad and cleanly; but a judge of faces would have readlittle hope for Birdy Edwards in those hard mouths and remorseless eyes.There was not a man in the room whose hands had not been reddened a dozentimes before. They were as hardened to human murder as a butcher to sheep.

Foremost, of course, both in appearance and in guilt, was the formidableBoss. Harraway, the secretary, was a lean, bitter man with a long, scraggyneck and nervous, jerky limbs, a man of incorruptible fidelity where thefinances of the order were concerned, and with no notion of justice orhonesty to anyone beyond. The treasurer, Carter, was a middle-aged man,with an impassive, rather sulky expression, and a yellow parchment skin.He was a capable organizer, and the actual details of nearly every outragehad sprung from his plotting brain. The two Willabys were men of action,tall, lithe young fellows with determined faces, while their companion,Tiger Cormac, a heavy, dark youth, was feared even by his own comrades forthe ferocity of his disposition. These were the men who assembled thatnight under the roof of McMurdo for the killing of the Pinkertondetective.

Their host had placed whisky upon the table, and they had hastened toprime themselves for the work before them. Baldwin and Cormac were alreadyhalf-drunk, and the liquor had brought out all their ferocity. Cormacplaced his hands on the stove for an instant—it had been lighted,for the nights were still cold.

“That will do,” said he, with an oath.

“Ay,” said Baldwin, catching his meaning. “If he is strapped to that, wewill have the truth out of him.”

“We'll have the truth out of him, never fear,” said McMurdo. He had nervesof steel, this man; for though the whole weight of the affair was on himhis manner was as cool and unconcerned as ever. The others marked it andapplauded.

“You are the one to handle him,” said the Boss approvingly. “Not a warningwill he get till your hand is on his throat. It's a pity there are noshutters to your windows.”

McMurdo went from one to the other and drew the curtains tighter. “Sure noone can spy upon us now. It's close upon the hour.”

“Maybe he won't come. Maybe he'll get a sniff of danger,” said thesecretary.

“He'll come, never fear,” McMurdo answered. “He is as eager to come as youcan be to see him. Hark to that!”

They all sat like wax figures, some with their glasses arrested halfway totheir lips. Three loud knocks had sounded at the door.

“Hush!” McMurdo raised his hand in caution. An exulting glance went roundthe circle, and hands were laid upon their weapons.

“Not a sound, for your lives!” McMurdo whispered, as he went from theroom, closing the door carefully behind him.

With strained ears the murderers waited. They counted the steps of theircomrade down the passage. Then they heard him open the outer door. Therewere a few words as of greeting. Then they were aware of a strange stepinside and of an unfamiliar voice. An instant later came the slam of thedoor and the turning of the key in the lock. Their prey was safe withinthe trap. Tiger Cormac laughed horribly, and Boss McGinty clapped hisgreat hand across his mouth.

“Be quiet, you fool!” he whispered. “You'll be the undoing of us yet!”

There was a mutter of conversation from the next room. It seemedinterminable. Then the door opened, and McMurdo appeared, his finger uponhis lip.

He came to the end of the table and looked round at them. A subtle changehad come over him. His manner was as of one who has great work to do. Hisface had set into granite firmness. His eyes shone with a fierceexcitement behind his spectacles. He had become a visible leader of men.They stared at him with eager interest; but he said nothing. Still withthe same singular gaze he looked from man to man.

“Well!” cried Boss McGinty at last. “Is he here? Is Birdy Edwards here?”

“Yes,” McMurdo answered slowly. “Birdy Edwards is here. I am BirdyEdwards!”

There were ten seconds after that brief speech during which the room mighthave been empty, so profound was the silence. The hissing of a kettle uponthe stove rose sharp and strident to the ear. Seven white faces, allturned upward to this man who dominated them, were set motionless withutter terror. Then, with a sudden shivering of glass, a bristle ofglistening rifle barrels broke through each window, while the curtainswere torn from their hangings.

At the sight Boss McGinty gave the roar of a wounded bear and plunged forthe half-opened door. A levelled revolver met him there with the sternblue eyes of Captain Marvin of the Mine Police gleaming behind the sights.The Boss recoiled and fell back into his chair.

“You're safer there, Councillor,” said the man whom they had known asMcMurdo. “And you, Baldwin, if you don't take your hand off your pistol,you'll cheat the hangman yet. Pull it out, or by the Lord that made me—There,that will do. There are forty armed men round this house, and you canfigure it out for yourself what chance you have. Take their pistols,Marvin!”

There was no possible resistance under the menace of those rifles. The menwere disarmed. Sulky, sheepish, and amazed, they still sat round thetable.

“I'd like to say a word to you before we separate,” said the man who hadtrapped them. “I guess we may not meet again until you see me on the standin the courthouse. I'll give you something to think over between now andthen. You know me now for what I am. At last I can put my cards on thetable. I am Birdy Edwards of Pinkerton's. I was chosen to break up yourgang. I had a hard and dangerous game to play. Not a soul, not one soul,not my nearest and dearest, knew that I was playing it. Only CaptainMarvin here and my employers knew that. But it's over to-night, thank God,and I am the winner!”

The seven pale, rigid faces looked up at him. There was unappeasablehatred in their eyes. He read the relentless threat.

“Maybe you think that the game is not over yet. Well, I take my chance ofthat. Anyhow, some of you will take no further hand, and there are sixtymore besides yourselves that will see a jail this night. I'll tell youthis, that when I was put upon this job I never believed there was such asociety as yours. I thought it was paper talk, and that I would prove itso. They told me it was to do with the Freemen; so I went to Chicago andwas made one. Then I was surer than ever that it was just paper talk; forI found no harm in the society, but a deal of good.

“Still, I had to carry out my job, and I came to the coal valleys. When Ireached this place I learned that I was wrong and that it wasn't a dimenovel after all. So I stayed to look after it. I never killed a man inChicago. I never minted a dollar in my life. Those I gave you were as goodas any others; but I never spent money better. But I knew the way intoyour good wishes and so I pretended to you that the law was after me. Itall worked just as I thought.

“So I joined your infernal lodge, and I took my share in your councils.Maybe they will say that I was as bad as you. They can say what they like,so long as I get you. But what is the truth? The night I joined you beatup old man Stanger. I could not warn him, for there was no time; but Iheld your hand, Baldwin, when you would have killed him. If ever I havesuggested things, so as to keep my place among you, they were things whichI knew I could prevent. I could not save Dunn and Menzies, for I did notknow enough; but I will see that their murderers are hanged. I gaveChester Wilcox warning, so that when I blew his house in he and his folkwere in hiding. There was many a crime that I could not stop; but if youlook back and think how often your man came home the other road, or wasdown in town when you went for him, or stayed indoors when you thought hewould come out, you'll see my work.”

“You blasted traitor!” hissed McGinty through his closed teeth.

“Ay, John McGinty, you may call me that if it eases your smart. You andyour like have been the enemy of God and man in these parts. It took a manto get between you and the poor devils of men and women that you heldunder your grip. There was just one way of doing it, and I did it. Youcall me a traitor; but I guess there's many a thousand will call me adeliverer that went down into hell to save them. I've had three months ofit. I wouldn't have three such months again if they let me loose in thetreasury at Washington for it. I had to stay till I had it all, every manand every secret right here in this hand. I'd have waited a little longerif it hadn't come to my knowledge that my secret was coming out. A letterhad come into the town that would have set you wise to it all. Then I hadto act and act quickly.

“I've nothing more to say to you, except that when my time comes I'll diethe easier when I think of the work I have done in this valley. Now,Marvin, I'll keep you no more. Take them in and get it over.”

There is little more to tell. Scanlan had been given a sealed note to beleft at the address of Miss Ettie Shafter, a mission which he had acceptedwith a wink and a knowing smile. In the early hours of the morning abeautiful woman and a much muffled man boarded a special train which hadbeen sent by the railroad company, and made a swift, unbroken journey outof the land of danger. It was the last time that ever either Ettie or herlover set foot in the Valley of Fear. Ten days later they were married inChicago, with old Jacob Shafter as witness of the wedding.

The trial of the Scowrers was held far from the place where theiradherents might have terrified the guardians of the law. In vain theystruggled. In vain the money of the lodge—money squeezed byblackmail out of the whole countryside—was spent like water in theattempt to save them. That cold, clear, unimpassioned statement from onewho knew every detail of their lives, their organization, and their crimeswas unshaken by all the wiles of their defenders. At last after so manyyears they were broken and scattered. The cloud was lifted forever fromthe valley.

McGinty met his fate upon the scaffold, cringing and whining when the lasthour came. Eight of his chief followers shared his fate. Fifty-odd hadvarious degrees of imprisonment. The work of Birdy Edwards was complete.

And yet, as he had guessed, the game was not over yet. There was anotherhand to be played, and yet another and another. Ted Baldwin, for one, hadescaped the scaffold; so had the Willabys; so had several others of thefiercest spirits of the gang. For ten years they were out of the world,and then came a day when they were free once more—a day whichEdwards, who knew his men, was very sure would be an end of his life ofpeace. They had sworn an oath on all that they thought holy to have hisblood as a vengeance for their comrades. And well they strove to keeptheir vow!

From Chicago he was chased, after two attempts so near success that it wassure that the third would get him. From Chicago he went under a changedname to California, and it was there that the light went for a time out ofhis life when Ettie Edwards died. Once again he was nearly killed, andonce again under the name of Douglas he worked in a lonely canyon, wherewith an English partner named Barker he amassed a fortune. At last therecame a warning to him that the bloodhounds were on his track once more,and he cleared—only just in time—for England. And thence camethe John Douglas who for a second time married a worthy mate, and livedfor five years as a Sussex county gentleman, a life which ended with thestrange happenings of which we have heard.

Epilogue

The police trial had passed, in which the case of John Douglas wasreferred to a higher court. So had the Quarter Sessions, at which he wasacquitted as having acted in self-defense.

“Get him out of England at any cost,” wrote Holmes to the wife. “There areforces here which may be more dangerous than those he has escaped. Thereis no safety for your husband in England.”

Two months had gone by, and the case had to some extent passed from ourminds. Then one morning there came an enigmatic note slipped into ourletter box. “Dear me, Mr. Holmes. Dear me!” said this singular epistle.There was neither superscription nor signature. I laughed at the quaintmessage; but Holmes showed unwonted seriousness.

“Deviltry, Watson!” he remarked, and sat long with a clouded brow.

Late last night Mrs. Hudson, our landlady, brought up a message that agentleman wished to see Mr. Holmes, and that the matter was of the utmostimportance. Close at the heels of his messenger came Cecil Barker, ourfriend of the moated Manor House. His face was drawn and haggard.

“I've had bad news—terrible news, Mr. Holmes,” said he.

“I feared as much,” said Holmes.

“You have not had a cable, have you?”

“I have had a note from someone who has.”

“It's poor Douglas. They tell me his name is Edwards; but he will alwaysbe Jack Douglas of Benito Canyon to me. I told you that they startedtogether for South Africa in the Palmyra three weeks ago.”

“Exactly.”

“The ship reached Cape Town last night. I received this cable from Mrs.Douglas this morning:

“'Jack has been lost overboard in gale off St. Helena. No one knows howaccident occurred.'

“'IVY DOUGLAS.'”

“Ha! It came like that, did it?” said Holmes thoughtfully. “Well, I've nodoubt it was well stage-managed.”

“You mean that you think there was no accident?”

“None in the world.”

“He was murdered?”

“Surely!”

“So I think also. These infernal Scowrers, this cursed vindictive nest ofcriminals—”

“No, no, my good sir,” said Holmes. “There is a master hand here. It is nocase of sawed-off shotguns and clumsy six-shooters. You can tell an oldmaster by the sweep of his brush. I can tell a Moriarty when I see one.This crime is from London, not from America.”

“But for what motive?”

“Because it is done by a man who cannot afford to fail, one whose wholeunique position depends upon the fact that all he does must succeed. Agreat brain and a huge organization have been turned to the extinction ofone man. It is crushing the nut with the triphammer—an absurdextravagance of energy—but the nut is very effectually crushed allthe same.”

“How came this man to have anything to do with it?”

“I can only say that the first word that ever came to us of the businesswas from one of his lieutenants. These Americans were well advised. Havingan English job to do, they took into partnership, as any foreign criminalcould do, this great consultant in crime. From that moment their man wasdoomed. At first he would content himself by using his machinery in orderto find their victim. Then he would indicate how the matter might betreated. Finally, when he read in the reports of the failure of thisagent, he would step in himself with a master touch. You heard me warnthis man at Birlstone Manor House that the coming danger was greater thanthe past. Was I right?”

Barker beat his head with his clenched fist in his impotent anger. “Do nottell me that we have to sit down under this? Do you say that no one canever get level with this king devil?”

“No, I don't say that,” said Holmes, and his eyes seemed to be looking farinto the future. “I don't say that he can't be beat. But you must give metime—you must give me time!”

We all sat in silence for some minutes while those fateful eyes stillstrained to pierce the veil.

