It was five o'clock on a winter's morning in Syria. Alongside the platform at
Aleppo stood the train grandly designated in railway guides as the Taurus Express.
It consisted of a kitchen and dining-car, a sleeping-car and two local coaches.
By the step leading up into the sleeping-car stood a young French
lieutenant, resplendent in uniform conversing, with a small man muffled up to
the ears of whom nothing was visible but a pink-tipped nose and the two points of
an upward-curled moustache.
It was freezingly cold, and this job of seeing off a distinguished stranger was not
one to be envied, but Lieutenant Dubosc performed his part manfully. Graceful
phrases fell from his lips in polished French. Not that he knew what it was
all about. There had been rumours, of course, as there always were in such
cases. The General's—his General's—temper had grown worse and worse. And
then there had come this Belgian stranger—all the way from England, it seemed.
There had been a week—a week of curious tensity. And then certain things had
happened. A very distinguished officer had committed suicide, another had
suddenly resigned, anxious faces had suddenly lost their anxiety, certain military
precautions were relaxed. And the General, Lieutenant Dubosc's own particular
General, had suddenly looked ten years younger.
Dubosc had overheard part of a conversation between him and the stranger. "You
have saved us, mon cher," said the General emotionally, his great white moustache
trembling as he spoke. "You have saved the honour of the French Army—you have
averted much bloodshed! How can I thank you for acceding to my request? To
have come so far—"
To which the stranger (by name M. Hercule Poirot) had made a fitting reply
including the phrase—"But indeed, do I not remember that once you saved my
life?" And then the General had made another fitting reply to that, disclaiming any
merit for that past service; and with more mention of France, of Belgium, of glory,
of honour and of such kindred things they had embraced each other heartily and
the conversation had ended.
As to what it had all been about, Lieutenant Dubosc was still in the dark, but to
him had been delegated the duty of seeing off M. Poirot by the Taurus Express,
and he was carrying it out with all the zeal and ardour befitting a young officer
with a promising career ahead of him.
"To-day is Sunday," said Lieutenant Dubosc. "Tomorrow, Monday evening, you
will be in Stamboul."
It was not the first time he had made this observation. Conversations on the
platform, before the departure of a train, are apt to be somewhat repetitive in
character.
"That is so," agreed M. Poirot.
"And you intend to remain there a few days, I think?"
"Mais oui. Stamboul, it is a city I have never visited. It would be a pity to pass
through—comme ça." He snapped his fingers descriptively. "Nothing presses—I
shall remain there as a tourist for a few days."
"La Sainte Sophie, it is very fine," said Lieutenant Dubosc, who had never seen it.
A cold wind came whistling down the platform. Both men shivered. Lieutenant
Dubosc managed to cast a surreptitious glance at his watch. Five minutes to five—
only five minutes more!
Fancying that the other man had noticed his glance, he hastened once more into
speech.
"There are few people travelling this time of year," he said, glancing up at the
windows of the sleeping-car above them.
"That is so," agreed M. Poirot.
"Let us hope you will not be snowed up in the Taurus!" "That happens?"
"It has occurred, yes. Not this year, as yet."
"Let us hope, then," said M. Poirot. "The weather reports from
Europe, they are bad.
"Very bad. In the Balkans there is much snow." "In Germany, too, I have heard."
"Eh bien," said Lieutenant Dubosc hastily as another pause seemed to be about to
occur. "Tomorrow evening at seven-forty you will be in Constantinople."
"Yes," said M. Poirot, and went on desperately, "La Sainte Sophie, I
have heard it is very fine." "Magnificent, I believe."
Above their heads the blinds of one of the sleeping-car
compartments was pushed aside and a young woman looked out.
Mary Debenham had had little sleep since she left Baghdad on the preceding
Thursday. Neither in the train to Kirkuk, nor in the Rest House at Mosul, nor last
night on the train had she slept properly. Now, weary of lying wakeful in the hot
stuffiness of her overheated compartment, she got up and peered out.
This must be Aleppo. Nothing to see, of course. Just a long, poorly lighted
platform with loud, furious altercations in Arabic going on somewhere. Two men
below her window were talking French. One was a French officer, the other was a
little man with enormous moustaches. She smiled faintly. She had never seen
anyone quite so heavily muffled up. It must be very cold outside. That was why
they heated the train so terribly. She tried to force the window down lower, but it
would not go.
The Wagon Lit conductor had come up to the two men. The train was about to
depart, he said. Monsieur had better mount. The little man removed his hat. What
an egg-shaped head he had! In spite of her preoccupations Mary Debenham
smiled. A ridiculous-looking little man. The sort of little man one could never
take seriously.
Lieutenant Dubosc was saying his parting speech. He had thought it out
beforehand and had kept it till the last minute. It was a very beautiful, polished
speech.
Not to be outdone, M. Poirot replied in kind. ...
"En voiture, Monsieur," said the Wagon Lit conductor. With an air of infinite
reluctance M. Poirot climbed aboard the train. The conductor climbed after him.
M. Poirot waved his hand. Lieutenant Dubosc came to the salute. The train, with a
terrific jerk, moved slowly forward.
"Enfin!" murmured M. Hercule Poirot.
"Brrrrrrrr," said Lieutenant Dubosc, realising to the full how cold he was.
"Voilà, Monsieur!" The conductor displayed to Poirot with a dramatic gesture
the beauty of his sleeping compartment and the neat arrangement of his luggage.
"The little valise of Monsieur, I have put it here."
His outstretched hand was suggestive. Hercule Poirot placed in it a folded note.
"Merci, Monsieur." The conductor became brisk and business-like. "I have the
tickets of Monsieur. I will also take the passport, please. Monsieur breaks his
journey in Stamboul, I understand?"
M. Poirot assented. "There are not many people travelling, I
imagine?" he said.
"No, Monsieur. I have only two other passengers—both English. A Colonel from
India and a young English lady from Baghdad. Monsieur requires anything?"
Monsieur demanded a small bottle of Perrier.
Five o'clock in the morning is an awkward time to board a train. There were still
two hours before dawn. Conscious of an inadequate night's sleep, and of a delicate
mission successfully accomplished, M. Poirot curled up in a corner and fell asleep.
When he awoke it was half-past nine he sallied forth to the restaurant car in search
of hot coffee.
There was only one occupant at the moment, obviously the young
English lady referred to by the conductor. She was tall, slim and dark—
perhaps twenty-eight years of age. There was a kind of cool efficiency in the way
she was eating her breakfast and in the way she called to the attendant to bring her
more coffee which bespoke a knowledge of the world and of travelling. She wore a
dark-coloured travelling dress of some thin material eminently suitable for the
heated atmosphere of the train.
M. Hercule Poirot, having nothing better to do, amused himself by studying her
without appearing to do so.
She was, he judged, the kind of young woman who could take care of herself with
perfect ease wherever she went. She had poise and efficiency. He rather liked the
severe regularity of her features and the delicate pallor of her skin. He liked the
burnished black head with its neat waves of hair, and her eyes—cool, impersonal
and grey. But she was, he decided, just a little too efficient to be what he called
"jolie femme."
Presently another person entered the restaurant car. This was a tall man of between
forty and fifty, lean of figure, brown of skin, with hair slightly grizzled round the
temples.
"The Colonel from India," said Poirot to himself.
The newcomer gave a little bow to the girl. "Morning, Miss
Debenham."
"Good morning, Colonel Arbuthnot."
The Colonel was standing with a hand on the chair opposite her. "Any objections?"
he asked.
"Of course not. Sit down."
"Well, you know, breakfast isn't always a chatty meal." "I should hope not. But I
don't bite."
The Colonel sat down. "Boy," he called in peremptory fashion. He gave an order
for eggs and coffee.
His eyes rested for a moment on Hercule Poirot, but they passed on indifferently.
Poirot, reading the English mind correctly, knew that he had said to himself. "Only
some damned foreigner."
True to their nationality, the two English people were not chatty. They exchanged a
few brief remarks and presently the girl rose and went back to her compartment.
At lunch time the other two again shared a table and again they both completely
ignored the third passenger. Their conversation was more animated than at
breakfast. Colonel Arbuthnot talked of the Punjab and occasionally asked the girl a
few questions about Baghdad where, it became clear, she had been in a post as
governess. In the course of conversation they discovered some mutual friends,
which had the immediate effect of making them more friendly and less stiff. They
discussed old Tommy Somebody and old Reggie Someone Else. The Colonel
inquired whether she was going straight through to England or whether she was
stopping in Stamboul.
"No, I'm going straight on." "Isn't that rather a pity?"
"I came out this way two years ago and spent three days in Stamboul then."
"Oh! I see. Well, I may say I'm very glad you are going right
through, because I am."
He made a kind of clumsy little bow, flushing a little as he did so. "He is
susceptible, our Colonel," thought Hercule Poirot to himself
with some amusement. "The train, it is as dangerous as a sea voyage!" Miss
Debenham said evenly that that would be very nice. Her
manner was slightly repressive.
The Colonel, Hercule Poirot noticed, accompanied her back to her compartment.
Later they passed through the magnificent scenery of the Taurus. As they looked
down towards the Cilician Gates, standing in the corridor side by side, a sigh came
suddenly from the girl. Poirot was standing near them and heard her murmur:
"It's so beautiful! I wish—I wish—" "Yes?"
"I wish I could enjoy it!"
Arbuthnot did not answer. The square line of his jaw seemed a little sterner and
grimmer.
"I wish to Heaven you were out of all this," he said. "Hush, please. Hush."
"Oh! it's all right." He shot a slightly annoyed glance in Poirot's direction. Then he
went on: "But I don't like the idea of your being a
governess—at the beck and call of tyrannical mothers and their tiresome
brats."
She laughed with just a hint of uncontrol in the sound.
"Oh! you mustn't think that. The downtrodden governess is quite an exploded
myth. I can assure you that it's the parents who are afraid of being bullied by me."
They said no more. Arbuthnot was, perhaps, ashamed of his outburst.
"Rather an odd little comedy that I watch here," said Poirot to himself
thoughtfully.
He was to remember that thought of his later.
They arrived at Konya that night about half-past eleven. The two English travellers
got out to stretch their legs, pacing up and down the snowy platform.
M. Poirot was content to watch the teeming activity of the station
through a window pane. After about ten minutes, however, he decided that a breath
of air would not perhaps be a bad thing after all. He made careful preparations,
wrapping himself in several coats and mufflers and encasing his neat boots in
goloshes. Thus attired, he descended gingerly to the platform and began to pace its
length. He walked out beyond the engine.
It was the voices which gave him the clue to the two indistinct figures standing in
the shadow of a traffic van. Arbuthnot was speaking.
"Mary—"
The girl interrupted him.
"Not now. Not now. When it's all over. When it's behind us—then—
"
Discreetly M. Poirot turned away. He wondered. ...
He would hardly have recognised the cool, efficient voice of Miss
Debenham. ...
"Curious," he said to himself.
The next day he wondered whether, perhaps, they had quarrelled. They spoke little
to each other. The girl, he thought, looked anxious. There were dark circles under
her eyes.
It was about half-past two in the afternoon when the train came to a halt. Heads
were poked out of windows. A little knot of men were clustered by the side of the
line looking and pointing at something under the dining-car.
Poirot leaned out and spoke to the Wagon Lit conductor who was hurrying past.
The man answered, and Poirot drew back his head and, turning, almost collided
with Mary Debenham who was standing just behind him.
"What is the matter?" she asked rather breathlessly in French. "Why are we
stopping?"
"It is nothing, Mademoiselle. It is something that has caught fire under the diningcar. Nothing serious. It is put out. They are now repairing the damage. There is
no danger, I assure you."
She made a little abrupt gesture, as though she were waving the idea of danger
aside as something completely unimportant.
"Yes, yes, I understand that. But the time!" "The time?"
"Yes, this will delay us."
"It is possible—yes," agreed Poirot.
"But we can't afford delay! This train is due in at 6.55, and one has to cross the
Bosphorus and catch the Simplon Orient Express on the other side at nine o'clock.
If there is an hour or two of delay we shall miss the connection."
"It is possible, yes," he admitted.
He looked at her curiously. The hand that held the window bar was not quite
steady; her lips, too, were trembling.
"Does it matter to you very much, Mademoiselle?" he asked. "Yes. Yes, it does.
I—I must catch that train."
She turned away from him and went down the corridor to join
Colonel Arbuthnot.
Her anxiety, however, was needless. Ten minutes later the train started again. It
arrived at Hayda-passar only five minutes late, having made up time on the
journey.
The Bosphorus was rough and M. Poirot did not enjoy the crossing. He was
separated from his travelling companions on the boat and did not see them again.
On arrival at the Galata Bridge he drove straight to the Tokatlian
Hotel.

At the Tokatlian, Hercule Poirot asked for a room with bath. Then he stepped over
to the concierge's desk and inquired for letters.
There were three waiting for him and a telegram. His eyebrows rose a little at the
sight of the telegram. It was unexpected.
He opened it in his usual neat, unhurried fashion. The printed words stood out
clearly.
Development you predicted in Kassner case has come unexpectedly.
Please return immediately.
"Voilà ce qui est embêtant," muttered Poirot vexedly. He glanced up at the clock.
"I shall have to go on to-night," he said to the concierge. "At what time does the
Simplon Orient leave?"
"At nine o'clock, Monsieur." "Can you get me a sleeper?"
"Assuredly, Monsieur. There is no difficulty this time of year. The trains are
almost empty. First-class or second?"
"First."
"Très bien, Monsieur. How far are you going?" "To London."
"Bien, Monsieur. I will get you a ticket to London and reserve your
sleeping-car accommodation in the Stamboul-Calais coach."
Poirot glanced at the clock again. It was ten minutes to eight. "I have time to dine?"
"But assuredly, Monsieur."
The little Belgian nodded. He went over and cancelled his room order and crossed
the hall to the restaurant.
As he was giving his order to the waiter, a hand was placed on his shoulder.
"Ah, mon vieux, but this is an unexpected pleasure!" said a voice behind him.
The speaker was a short stout elderly man, his hair cut en brosse. He was smiling
delightedly.
Poiret sprang up. "M. Bouc!"
"M. Poirot!"
M. Bouc was a Belgian, a director of the Compagnie Internationale des Wagons
Lits, and his acquaintance with the former star of the Belgian police force dated
back many years.
"You find yourself far from home, mon cher," said M. Bouc. "A little affair in
Syria."
"Ah! and you return home—when?"
"To-night."
"Splendid! I, too. That is to say, I go as far as Lausanne, where I
have affairs. You travel on the Simplon Orient, I presume?"
"Yes. I have just asked them to get me a sleeper. It was my intention to remain here
some days, but I have. received a telegram recalling me to England on important
business."
"Ah!" sighed M. Bouc. "Les affaires—les affaires! But you, you are at the top of
the tree nowadays, mon vieux!"
"Some little success I have had, perhaps." Hercule Poirot tried to look modest but
failed signally.
M. Bouc laughed.
"We will meet later," he said.
Hercule Poirot addressed himself to the task of keeping his moustaches out of the
soup.
That difficult task accomplished, he glanced round him whilst waiting for the
next course. There were only about half a dozen people in the restaurant, and of
those half dozen there were only two that interested Hercule Poirot.
These two sat at a table not far away. The younger was a likeable- looking young
man of thirty, clearly an American. It was, however, not he but his companion who
had attracted the little detective's attention.
He was a man perhaps of between sixty and seventy. From a little
distance he had the bland aspect of a philanthropist. His slightly bald head, his
domed forehead, the smiling mouth that displayed a very white set of false
teeth—all seemed to speak of a benevolent personality. Only the eyes belied
this assumption. They were small, deep-set and crafty. Not only that. As the man,
making some remark to his young companion, glanced across the room, his gaze
stopped on Poirot for a moment and just for that second there was a strange
malevolence, an unnatural tensity in the glance.
Then he rose.
"Pay the bill, Hector," he said.
His voice was slightly husky in tone. It had a queer, soft, dangerous quality.
When Poirot rejoined his friend in the lounge, the other two men were just leaving
the hotel. Their luggage was being brought down. The younger was supervising the
process. Presently he opened the glass door and said:
"Quite ready now, Mr. Ratchett."
The elder man grunted an assent and passed out.
"Eh bien," said Poirot. "What do you think of those two?" "They are Americans,"
said M. Bouc.
"Assuredly they are Americans. I meant what did you think of their personalities?"
"The young man seemed quite agreeable." "And the other?"
"To tell you the truth, my friend, I did not care for him. He produced on me an
unpleasant impression. And you?"
Hercule Poirot was a moment in replying.
"When he passed me in the restaurant," he said at last, "I had a curious impression.
It was as though a wild animal—an animal savage, but savage! you understand—
had passed me by."
"And yet he looked altogether of the most respectable."
"Précisément! The body—the cage—is everything of the most respectable—
but through the bars, the wild animal looks out."
"You are fanciful, mon vieux," said M. Bouc.
"It may be so. But I could not rid myself of the impression that evil had passed me
by very close."
"That respectable American gentleman?" "That respectable American gentleman."
"Well," said M. Bouc cheerfully, "it may be so. There is much evil in the world."
At that moment the door opened and the concierge came towards
them. He looked concerned and apologetic.
"It is extraordinary, Monsieur," he said to Poirot. "There is not one first-class
sleeping berth to be had on the train."
"Comment?" cried M. Bouc. "At this time of year? Ah, without doubt there is some
party of journalists—of politicians—?"
"I don't know, sir," said the concierge, turning to him respectfully. "But that's how
it is."
"Well, well." M. Bouc turned to Poirot. "Have no fear, my friend. We will arrange
something. There is always one compartment, the No.
16, which is not engaged. The conductor sees to that!" He smiled, then
glanced up at the clock. "Come," he said, "it is time we started."
At the station M. Bouc was greeted with respectful empressement by the brownuniformed Wagon Lit conductor.
"Good evening, Monsieur. Your compartment is the No. 1."
He called to the porters and they wheeled their load halfway along the carriage on
which the tin plates proclaimed its destination:
ISTANBUL TRIESTE CALAIS "You are full up to-night, I hear?"
"It is incredible, Monsieur. All the world elects to travel to-night!"
"All the same you must find room for this gentleman here. He is a friend of mine.
He can have the No. 16."
"It is taken, Monsieur." "What? The No. 16?"
A glance of understanding passed between them, and the conductor smiled. He was
a tall sallow man of middle age.
"But yes, Monsieur. As I told you, we are full—full—everywhere." "But what
passes itself?" demanded M. Bouc angrily. "There is a
conference somewhere? It is a party?"
"No, Monsieur. It is only chance. It just happens that many people have elected to
travel to-night."
M. Bouc made a clicking sound of annoyance.
"At Belgrade," he said, "there will be the slip coach from Athens. There will also
be the Bucharest-Paris coach. But we do not reach Belgrade until to-morrow
evening. The problem is for to-night. There is no second-class berth free?"
"There is a second-class berth, Monsieur—" "Well, then—"
"But it is a lady's berth. there is already a German woman in the
compartment—a lady's maid."
"Là- là, that is awkward," said M. Bouc.
"Do not distress yourself, my friend," said Poirot. "I must travel in an ordinary
carriage."
"Not at all. Not at all." He turned once more to the conductor.
"Everyone has arrived?"
"It is true," said the man, "that there is one passenger who has not yet arrived." He
spoke slowly, with hesitation.
"But speak then!"
"No. 7 berth—a second-class. The gentleman has not yet come, and it is four
minutes to nine."
"Who is it?"
"An Englishman," the conductor consulted his list. "A M. Harris."
"A name of good omen," said Poirot. "I read my Dickens. M. Harris he will not
arrive."
"Put Monsieur's luggage in No. 7," said M. Bouc. "If this M. Harris
arrives we will tell him that he is too late—that berths cannot be retained so
long—we will arrange the matter one way or another. What do I care for a M.
Harris?"
"As Monsieur pleases," said the conductor. He spoke to Poirot's porter, directing
him where to go. Then he stood aside from the steps to let Poirot enter the train.
"Tout à fait au bout, Monsieur," he called. "The end compartment
but one."
Poirot passed along the corridor, a somewhat slow progress, since most of the
people travelling were standing outside their carriages.
His polite "Pardons" were uttered with the regularity of clockwork. At last he
reached the compartment indicated. Inside it, reaching up to a suitcase, was the tall
young American of the Tokatlian.
He frowned as Poirot entered.
"Excuse me," he said. "I think you've made a mistake." Then, laboriously in
French: "Je crois qua vous avez un erreur."
Poirot replied in English. "You are Mr. Harris?" "No, my name is MacQueen. I—"
But at that moment the voice of the Wagon Lit conductor spoke from over Poirot's
shoulder—an apologetic, rather breathless voice.
"There is no other berth on the train, Monsieur. The gentleman has to come in
here."
He was hauling up the corridor window as he spoke and began to lift
in Poirot's luggage.
Poirot noticed the apology in his tone with some amusement. Doubtless the man
had been promised a good tip if he could keep the compartment for the sole use of
the other traveller. However, even the most munificent of tips lose their effect
when a Director of the Company is on board and issues his orders.
The conductor emerged from the compartment, having swung the suitcases up onto
the racks.
"Voilà, Monsieur," he said. "All is arranged. Yours is the upper berth, the No. 7.
We start in one minute."
He hurried off down the corridor. Poirot re-entered the compartment.
"A phenomenon I have seldom seen," he said cheerfully. "A Wagon
Lit conductor himself puts up the luggage! It is unheard of!"
His fellow traveller smiled. He had evidently got over his annoyance—had
probably decided that it was no good to take the
matter otherwise than philosophically. "The train's remarkably full," he said.
A whistle blew, there was a long melancholy cry from the engine. Both men
stepped out into the corridor. Outside a voice shouted, "En voiture!"
"We're off," said MacQueen.
But they were not quite off. The whistle blew again.
"I say, sir," said the young man suddenly. "If you'd rather have the lower berth—
easier and all that—well, that's all right by me."
A likeable young fellow.
"No, no," protested Poirot. "I would not deprive you—" "That's all right—"
"You are too amiable—" Polite protests on both sides.
"It is for one night only," explained Poirot. "At Belgrade—"
"Oh! I see. You're getting out at Belgrade—" "Not exactly. You see—"
There was a sudden jerk. Both men swung round to the window, looking out at the
long lighted platform as it slid slowly past them.
The Orient Express had started on its three-day journey across
Europe.

M. Hercule Poirot was a little late in entering the luncheon-car on the following
day. He had risen early, had breakfasted almost alone, and had spent the morning
going over the notes of the case that was recalling him to London. He had
seen little of his travelling companion.
M. Bouc, who was already seated, gated a greeting and summoned his friend to the
empty place opposite him. Poirot sat down and soon found himself in the favoured
position of being at the table which was served first and with the choicest morsels.
The food, too, was unusually good.
It was not till they were eating a delicate cream cheese that M. Bouc
allowed his attention to wander to matters other than nourishment. He was at the
stage of a meal when one becomes philosophic.
"Ah!" he sighed. "If I had but the pen of a Balzac! I would depict this scene." He
waved a hand.
"It is an idea, that," said Poirot.
"Ah, you agree? It has not been done, I think? And yet—it lends itself to romance,
my friend. All around us are people, of all classes, of all nationalities, of all ages.
For three days these people, these strangers to one another, are brought together.
They sleep and eat under one roof, they cannot get away from each other. At the
end of three days they part, they go their several ways, never perhaps to see each
other again."
"And yet," said Poirot, "suppose an accident—" "Ah, no, my friend—"
"From your point of view it would be regrettable, I agree. But nevertheless let us
just for one moment suppose it. Then, perhaps, all these here are linked together—
by death."
"Some more wine," said M. Bouc, hastily pouring it out. "You are morbid, mon
cher. It is, perhaps the digestion."
"It is true," agreed Poirot, "that the food in Syria was not perhaps quite suited to
my stomach."
He sipped his wine. Then, leaning back, he ran his eye thoughtfully round the
dining-car. There were thirteen people seated there and, as M. Bouc had said, of all
classes and nationalities. He began to study them.
At the table opposite them were three men. They were, he guessed, single
travellers graded and placed there by the unerring judgment of the restaurant
attendants. A big swarthy Italian was picking his teeth with gusto. Opposite
him a spare neat Englishman had the expressionless disapproving face of
the well-trained servant. Next to the Englishman was a big American in a loud
suit—possibly a commercial traveller.
"You've got to put it over big," he was saying in a loud, nasal voice. The Italian
removed his toothpick to gesticulate with it freely. "Sure," he said. "That whatta I
say alla de time."
The Englishman looked out of the window and coughed. Poirot's eye passed on.
At a small table, sitting very upright, was one of the ugliest old ladies he had ever
seen. It was an ugliness of distinction—it fascinated rather than repelled. She sat
very upright. Round her neck was a collar of very large pearls which, improbable
though it seemed, were real. Her hands were covered with rings. Her sable coat
was pushed back on her shoulders. A very small and expensive black toque was
hideously unbecoming to the yellow, toad-like face beneath it.
She was speaking now to the restaurant attendant in a clear,
courteous, but completely autocratic tone.
"You will be sufficiently amiable to place in my compartment a bottle of mineral
water and a large glass of orange juice. You will arrange that I shall have chicken
cooked without sauces for dinner this evening—also some boiled fish."
The attendant replied respectfully that it should be done.
She gave a slight gracious nod of the head and rose. Her glance caught Poirot's and
swept over him with the nonchalance of the uninterested aristocrat.
"That is Princess Dragomiroff," said M. Bouc in a low tone. "She is a Russian. Her
husband realised all his money before the Revolution and invested it abroad. She is
extremely rich. A cosmopolitan."
Poirot nodded. He had heard of Princess Dragomiroff.
"She is a personality," said M. Bouc. "Ugly as sin but she makes herself felt. You
agree?"
Poirot agreed.
At another of the large tables Mary Debenham was sitting with two other women.
One of them was tall and middle-aged, in a plaid blouse and tweed skirt. She had a
mass of faded yellow hair unbecomingly arranged in a large bun, wore glasses, and
had a long mild amiable face rather like a sheep. She was listening to the third
woman, a stout, pleasant-faced, elderly person who was talking in a slow
clear monotone which showed no signs of pausing for breath or coming to a stop.
"—and so my daughter said, 'Why,' she said, 'you just can't apply American
methods in this country. It's natural to the folks here to be indolent,' she said. 'They
just haven't got any hustle in them—' But all the same you'd be surprised to know
what our college there is doing. They've got a fine staff of teachers. I guess there's
nothing like education. We've got to apply our Western ideals and teach the East to
recognise them. My daughter says—"
The train plunged into a tunnel. The calm, monotonous voice was drowned.
At the next table, a small one, sat Colonel Arbuthnot—alone. His gaze was fixed
upon the back of Mary Debenham's head. They were not sitting together. Yet it
could easily have been managed. Why?
Perhaps, Poirot thought, Mary Debenham had demurred. A governess
learns to be careful. Appearances are important. A girl with her living to get has to
be discreet.
His glance shifted to the other side of the carriage. At the far end,
against the wall, was a middle-aged woman dressed in black with a broad,
expressionless face. German or Scandinavian, he thought. Probably the German
lady's-maid.
Beyond her were a couple leaning forward and talking animatedly together. The
man wore English clothes of loose tweed, but he was not English. Though only the
back of his head was visible to Poirot, the shape of it and the set of the shoulders
betrayed him. A big man, well made. He turned his head suddenly and Poirot saw
his profile. A very handsome man of thirty-odd with a big fair moustache.
The woman opposite him was a mere girl—twenty at a guess. A tight-fitting little
black coat and skirt, white satin blouse, small chic black toque perched at the
fashionable outrageous angle. She had a beautiful foreign-looking face, dead white
skin, large brown eyes, jet black hair. She was smoking a cigarette in a long
holder. Her manicured hands had deep red nails. She wore one large emerald set in
platinum. There was coquetry in her glance and voice.
"Elle est jolie—et chic," murmured Poirot. "Husband and wife—
eh?"
M. Bouc nodded. "Hungarian Embassy, I believe," he said. "A
handsome couple."
There were only two more lunchers—Poirot's fellow traveller MacQueen and his
employer Mr. Ratchett. The latter sat facing Poirot, and for the second time Poirot
studied that unprepossessing face, noting the false benevolence of the brow and the
small, cruel eyes.
Doubtless M. Bouc saw a change in his friend's expression. "It is at your wild
animal you look?" he asked.
Poirot nodded.
As his coffee was brought to him, M. Bouc rose to his feet. Having started before
Poirot he had finished some time ago.
"I return to my compartment," he said. "Come along presently and converse with
me."
"With pleasure."
Poirot sipped his coffee and ordered a liqueur. The attendant was passing from
table to table with his box of money, accepting payment for bills. The elderly
American lady's voice rose shrill and plaintive.
"My daughter said: 'Take a book of food tickets and you'll have no trouble—no
trouble at all.' Now, that isn't so. Seems they have to have a ten per cent tip, and
then there's that bottle of mineral water—and a
queer sort of water too. They didn't have any Evian or Vichy, which seems queer to
me."
"It is—they must—how do you say?—serve the water of the country,"
explained the sheep-faced lady.
"Well, it seems queer to me." She looked distastefully at the heap of small change
on the table in front of her. "Look at all this peculiar stuff he's given me. Dinars or
something. Just a lot of rubbish, it looks like! My daughter said—"
Mary Debenham pushed back her chair and left with a slight bow to the other two.
Colonel Arbuthnot got up and followed her. Gathering up her despised money the
American woman followed suit, followed by the other one like a sheep. The
Hungarians had already departed. The restaurant car was empty save for Poirot and
Ratchett and MacQueen.
Ratchett spoke to his companion, who got up and left the car. Then he rose
himself, but instead of following MacQueen he dropped unexpectedly into the seat
opposite Poirot.
"Can you oblige me with a light?" he said. His voice was soft—
faintly nasal. "My name is Ratchett."
Poirot bowed slightly. He slipped his hand into his pocket and produced a
matchbox which he handed to the other man, who took it but did not strike a light.
"I think," he went on, "that I have the pleasure of speaking to Mr. Hercule Poirot.
Is that so?"
Poirot bowed again. "You have been correctly informed, Monsieur." The detective
was conscious of those strange shrewd eyes summing
him up before the other spoke again.
"In my country," he said, "we come to the point quickly. Mr. Poirot, I want you to
take on a job for me."
Hercule Poirot's eyebrows went up a trifle.
"My clientèle, Monsieur, is limited nowadays. I undertake very few cases."
"Why, naturally, I understand that. But this, Mr. Poirot, means big money." He
repeated again in his soft, persuasive voice, "Big money."
Hercule Poirot was silent a minute or two. Then he said: "What is it you wish me
to do for you, Monsieur—er—Ratchett?"
"Mr. Poirot, I am a rich man—a very rich man. Men in that position have enemies.
I have an enemy."
"Only one enemy?"
"Just what do you mean by that question?" asked Ratchett sharply. "Monsieur, in
my experience when a man is in a position to have, as
you say, enemies, then it does not usually resolve itself into one enemy only."
Ratchett seemed relieved by—Poirot's answer. He said quickly:
"Why, yes, I appreciate that point. Enemy or enemies—it doesn't matter. What
does matter is my safety."
"Safety?"
"My life has been threatened, Mr. Poirot. Now I'm a man who can take pretty good
care of himself." From the pocket of his coat his hand brought a small automatic
into sight for a moment. He continued grimly. "I don't think I'm the kind of
man to be caught napping. But, as I look at it, I might as well make assurance
doubly sure. I fancy you're the man for my money, Mr. Poirot. And remember—
big money."
Poirot looked at him thoughtfully for some minutes. His face was completely
expressionless. The other could have had no clue as to what thoughts were passing
in that mind.
"I regret, Monsieur," he said at length, "that I cannot oblige you."
The other looked at him shrewdly. "Name your figure, then," he said.
Poirot shook his head.
"You do not understand, Monsieur. I have been very fortunate in my profession. I
have made enough money to satisfy both my needs and my caprices. I take now
only such cases as—interest me."
"You've got a pretty good nerve," said Ratchett. "Will twenty thousand dollars
tempt you?"
"It will not."
"If you're holding out for more, you won't get it. I know what a thing's worth to
me."
"I, also, M. Ratchett."
"What's wrong with my proposition?"
Poirot rose. "If you will forgive me for being personal—I do not like your face, M.
Ratchett," he said.
And with that he left the restaurant car.
The Simplon Orient Express arrived at Belgrade at a quarter to nine that evening. It
was not due to depart again until 9.15, so Poirot descended to the platform. He did
not, however, remain there long. The cold was bitter, and though the platform itself
was protected, heavy snow was falling outside. He returned to his compartment.
The conductor, who was on the platform stamping his feet and waving his arms to
keep warm, spoke to him.
"Your valises have been moved, Monsieur. To the compartment No.
1, the compartment of M. Bouc."
"But where is Monsieur Bouc, then?"
"He has moved into the coach from Athens which has just been put on."
Poirot went in search of his friend. M. Bouc waved his protestations aside.
"It is nothing. It is nothing. It is more convenient like this. You are
going through to England, so it is better that you should stay in the through coach
to Calais. Me, I am very well here. It is most peaceful. This coach is empty save
for myself and one little Greek doctor. Ah! my friend, what a night! They say there
has not been so much snow for years. Let us hope we shall not be held up. I am not
too happy about it, I can tell you."
At 9.15 punctually the train pulled out of the station, and shortly afterwards Poirot
got up, said good night to his friend, and made his way along the corridor back into
his own coach which was in front next to the dining-car.
On this, the second day of the journey, barriers were breaking down.
Colonel Arbuthnot was standing at the door of his compartment talking
to MacQueen. When MacQueen saw Poirot he broke off something he was saying.
He looked very much surprised.
"Why," he cried, "I thought you'd left us. You said you were getting off at
Belgrade."
"You misunderstood me," said Poirot, smiling. "I remember now, the train started
from Stamboul just as we were talking about it."
"But, man, your baggage. It's gone."
"It has been moved into another compartment, that is all." "Oh! I see."
He resumed his conversation with Arbuthnot, and Poirot passed on
down the corridor.
Two doors from his own compartment, the elderly American, Mrs. Hubbard, was
standing talking to the sheep-like lady, who was a Swede. Mrs. Hubbard was
pressing a magazine on the other.
"No, do take it, my dear," she said. "I've got plenty of other things to
read. My, isn't the cold something frightful?" She nodded amicably to
Poirot.
"You are most kind," said the Swedish lady.
"Not at all. I hope you'll sleep well and that your head will be better in the
morning."
"It is the cold only. I make now myself a cup of tea."
"Have you got some aspirin? Are you sure now? I've got plenty. Well, good night,
my dear."
She turned to Poirot conversationally as the other woman departed. "Poor creature,
she's a Swede. As far as I can make out she's a kind
of missionary. A teaching one. A nice creature, but doesn't talk much
English. She was most interested in what I told her about my daughter." Poirot, by
now, knew all about Mrs. Hubbard's daughter. Everyone
on the train who could understand English did! How she and her husband were on
the staff of a big American college in Smyrna, and how this was Mrs. Hubbard's
first journey to the East, and what she thought of the Turks and their slipshod ways
and the condition of their roads.
The door next to them opened and the thin pale manservant stepped out. Inside,
Poirot caught a glimpse of Mr. Ratchett sitting up in bed.
He saw Poirot and his face changed, darkening with anger. Then the door was shut.
Mrs. Hubbard drew Poirot a little wide.
"You know, I'm dead scared of that man. Oh! not the valet—the other. His master.
Master, indeed! There's something wrong about that man. My daughter always
says I'm very intuitive. 'When Mamma gets a hunch, she's dead right,' that's what
my daughter says. And I've got a hunch about that man. He's next door to me and I
don't like it. I put my grips against the communicating door last night. I thought I
heard him trying the handle. Duo you know, I shouldn't be a bit surprised if that
man turned out to be a murderer—one of these train robbers you read about. I
daresay I'm foolish, but there it is. I'm absolutely scared to death of the man! My
daughter said I'd have an easy journey, but somehow I don't feel happy about it. It
may be foolish, but I feel as if anything might happen—anything at all. And how
that nice young fellow can bear to be his secretary, I can't think."
Colonel Arbuthnot and MacQueen were coming towards them down the corridor.
"Come into my carriage," MacQueen was saying. "It isn't made up for the night
yet. Now what I want to get right about your policy in India is this—"
The two men passed and went on down the corridor to MacQueen's carriage.
Mrs. Hubbard said good night to Poirot. "I guess I'll go right to bed and read," she
said. "Good night."
"Good night, Madame."
Poirot passed into his own compartment, which was the next one beyond
Ratchett's. He undressed and got into bed, read for about half an hour and then
turned out the light.
He awoke some hours later, awoke with a start. He knew what it was that had
wakened him—a loud groan, almost a cry, somewhere close at hand. At the same
moment the ting of a bell sounded sharply.
Poirot sat up and switched on the light. He noticed that the train was at a
standstill—presumably at a station.
That cry had startled him. He remembered that it was Ratchett who had the next
compartment. He got out of bed and opened the door just as the Wagon Lit
conductor came hurrying along the corridor and knocked on Ratchett's door.
Poirot kept his door open a crack and watched. The conductor tapped a second
time. A bell rang and a light showed over another door farther down. The
conductor glanced over his shoulder. At the same moment a voice from within the
next compartment called out: "Ce n'est rien. Je me suis trompé."
"Bien, Monsieur." The conductor scurried off again, to knock at the door where the
light was showing.
Poirot returned to bed, his mind relieved, and switched off the light. He glanced at
his watch. It was just twenty-three minutes to one.
He found it difficult to go to sleep again at once. For one thing he missed the
motion of the train. If it was a station outside, it was curiously quiet. By contrast
the noises on the train seemed unusually loud. He could hear Ratchett moving
about next door—a click as he pulled down the washbasin, the sound of the tap
running, a splashing noise, then another click as the basin shut to again. Footsteps
passed up the corridor outside, the shuffling footsteps of someone in bedroom
slippers.
Hercule Poirot lay awake staring at the ceiling. Why was the station outside so
silent? His throat felt dry. He had forgotten to ask for his usual bottle of mineral
water. He looked at his watch again. Just after a quarter past one. He would ring
for the conductor and ask for some mineral water. His finger went out to the bell,
but he paused as in the stillness he heard a ting. The man couldn't answer every
bell at once.
Ting. ... Ting. ... Ting. ...
It sounded again and again. Where was the man? Somebody was getting impatient.
Ti-i-i-ing!
Whoever it was, was keeping a finger solidly on the push-button. Suddenly with a
rush, his footsteps echoing up the aisle, the man
came. He knocked at a door not far from Poirot's own.
Then came voices—the conductor's, deferential, apologetic; and a woman's,
insistent and voluble.
Mrs. Hubbard!
Poirot smiled to himself.
The altercation—if it was one—went on for some time. Its proportions were ninety
per cent of Mrs. Hubbard's to a soothing ten
per cent of the conductor's. Finally the matter seemed to be adjusted. Poirot heard
distinctly a "Bonne nuit, Madame," and a closing door.
He pressed his own finger on the bell.
The conductor arrived promptly. He looked hot and worried. "De l'eau minérale,
s'il vous Plaît."
"Bien, Monsieur." Perhaps a twinkle in Poirot's eye led him to unburden himself.
"La dame américaine—"
"Yes?"
He wiped his forehead. "Imagine to yourself the time I have had with her! She
insists—but insists—that there is a man in her compartment! Figure to yourself,
Monsieur. In a space of this size." He swept a hand round. "Where would he
conceal himself? I argue with her. I point out that it is impossible. She insists. She
woke up, and there was a man there. And how, I ask, did he get out and leave the
door bolted behind him? But she will not listen to reason. As though there were not
enough to worry us already. This snow—"
"Snow?"
"But yes, Monsieur. Monsieur has not noticed? The train has stopped. We
have run into a snowdrift. Heaven knows how long we shall be here. I remember
once being snowed up for seven days."
"Where are we?"
"Between Vincovci and Brod." "Là-là," said Poirot vexedly.
The man withdrew and returned with the water. "Bon soir, Monsieur."
Poirot drank a glass of water and composed himself to sleep.
He was just dropping off when something again woke him. This time it was as
though something heavy had fallen with a thud against the door.
He sprang up, opened it and looked out. Nothing. But to his right, some distance
down the corridor, a woman wrapped in a scarlet kimono was retreating from him.
At the other end, sitting on his little seat, the conductor was entering up figures on
large sheets of paper. Everything was deathly quiet.
"Decidedly I suffer from the nerves," said Poirot and retired to bed again. This time
he slept till morning.
When he awoke the train was still at a standstill. He raised a blind and looked out.
Heavy banks of snow surrounded the train.
He glanced at his watch and saw that it was past nine o'clock.
At a quarter to ten, neat, spruce and dandified as ever, he made his way to the
restaurant car, where a chorus of woe was going on.
Any barriers there might have been between the passengers had now quite broken
down. All were united by a common misfortune. Mrs. Hubbard was loudest in her
lamentations.
"My daughter said it would be the easiest way in the world. Just sit in the train
until I got to Parrus. And now we may be here for days and days," she wailed.
"And my boat sails day after to-morrow. How am I going to catch it now? Why, I
can't even wire to cancel my passage. I'm just too mad to talk about it!"
The Italian said that he had urgent business himself in Milan. The large American
said that that was "too bad, Ma'am," and soothingly expressed a hope that the train
might make up time.
"My sister—her children wait me," said the Swedish lady, and wept. "I get no word
to them. What they think? They will say bad things have happen to me."
"How long shall we be here?" demanded Mary Debenham. "Doesn't anybody
know?"
Her voice sounded impatient, but Poirot noted that there were no signs of that
almost feverish anxiety which she had displayed during the check to the Taurus
Express.
Mrs. Hubbard was off again.
"There isn't anybody knows a thing on this train. And nobody's trying to do
anything. Just a pack of useless foreigners. Why, if this were at home, there'd be
someone at least trying to do something!"
Arbuthnot turned to Poirot and spoke in careful British French.
"Vous êtes un directeur de la ligne, je crois, Monsieur. Vous pouvez nous dire—"
Smiling, Poirot corrected him.
"No, no," he said in English. "It is not I. You confound me with my friend, M.
Bouc."
"Oh, I'm sorry"
"Not at all. It is most natural. I am now in the compartment that he had formerly."
M. Bouc was not present in the restaurant car. Poirot looked about to notice who
else was absent.
Princess Dragomiroff was missing, and the Hungarian couple. Also
Ratchett, his valet, and the German lady's-maid.
The Swedish lady wiped her eyes.
"I am foolish," she said. "I am bad to cry. All is for the best, whatever
happen."
This Christian spirit, however, was far from being shared.
"That's all very well," said MacQueen restlessly. "We may be here for days."
"What is this country anyway?" demanded Mrs. Hubbard tearfully. On being told it
was Jugo-Slavia, she said: "Oh! one of these Balkan
things. What can you expect?"
"You are the only patient one, Mademoiselle," said Poirot to Miss
Debenham.
She shrugged her shoulders slightly. "What can one do?" "You are a philosopher,
Mademoiselle."
"That implies a detached attitude. I think my attitude is more selfish. I have learned
to save myself useless emotion."
She was speaking more to herself than to him. She was not even looking at him.
Her gaze went past him, out of the window to where the snow lay in heavy masses.
"You are a strong character, Mademoiselle," said Poirot gently. "You are, I think,
the strongest character amongst us."
"Oh! no. No, indeed. I know one far, far stronger than I am." "And that is—?"
She seemed suddenly to come to herself, to realise that she was talking to a
stranger and foreigner, with whom, until this morning, she had exchanged only half
a dozen sentences.
She laughed, a polite but estranging laugh.
"Well—that old lady, for instance. You have probably noticed her. A very ugly old
lady but rather fascinating. She has only to lift a little finger and ask for something
in a polite voice—and the whole train runs."
"It runs also for my friend M. Bouc," said Poirot. "But that is because he is
a director of the line, not because he has a strong character."
Mary Debenham smiled.
The morning wore away. Several people, Poirot amongst them, remained in the
dining-car. The communal life was felt, at the moment, to pass the time better.
He heard a good deal more about Mrs. Hubbard's daughter, and he heard the
lifelong habits of Mr. Hubbard, deceased, from his rising in the morning and
commencing breakfast with a cereal to his final rest at night in the bedsocks that Mrs. Hubbard herself had been in the habit of knitting for him.
It was when he was listening to a confused account of the missionary aims of the
Swedish lady that one of the Wagon Lit conductors came into the car and stood at
his elbow.
"Pardon, Monsieur." "Yes?"
"The compliments of M. Bouc, and he would be glad if you would be so kind as to
come to him for a few minutes."
Poirot rose, uttered excuses to the Swedish lady and followed the man out of the
dining-car. It was not his own conductor, but a big fair man.
He followed his guide down the corridor of his own carriage and
along the corridor of the next one. The man tapped at a door, then stood aside to let
Poirot enter.
The compartment was not M. Bouc's own. It was a second-class one—chosen
presumably because of its slightly larger size. It certainly gave the impression of
being crowded.
M. Bouc himself was sitting on the small seat in the opposite corner. In the corner
next the window, facing him, was a small dark man looking out at the snow.
Standing up and quite preventing Poirot from
advancing any farther were a big man in blue uniform (the chef de train) and his
own Wagon Lit conductor.
"Ah! my good friend," cried M. Bouc. "Come in. We have need of you."
The little man in the window shifted along the seat, and Poirot squeezed
past: the other two men and sat down facing his friend.
The expression on M. Bouc's face gave him, as he would have expressed it,
furiously to think. It was clear that something out of the common had happened.
"What has occurred?" he asked.
"You may well ask that. First this snow-this stoppage. And now—" He paused—
and a sort of strangled gasp came from the Wagon Lit
conductor.
"And now what?"
"And now a passenger lies dead in his berth—stabbed." M. Bouc spoke with a kind
of calm desperation.
"A passenger? Which passenger?"
"An American. A man called—called—" he consulted some notes in front of him.
"Ratchett. That is right—Ratchett?"
"Yes, Monsieur," the Wagon Lit man gulped.
Poirot looked at him. He was as white as chalk.
"You had better let that man sit down," he said. "He may faint otherwise."
The chef de train moved slightly and the Wagon Lit man sank down in the corner
and buried his face in his hands.
"Brr!" said Poirot. "This is serious!"
"Certainly it is serious. To begin with, a murder—that in itself is a calamity of the
first water. But not only that, the circumstances are unusual. Here we are, brought
to a standstill. We may be here for hours—and not only hours—days! Another
circumstance—passing through most countries we have the police of that country
on the train. But in Jugo-Slavia, no. You comprehend?"
"It is a position of great difficulty," said Poirot.
"There is worse to come. Dr. Constantine—I forgot, I have not introduced you. Dr.
Constantine, M. Poirot."
The little dark man bowed, and Poirot returned the bow.
"Dr. Constantine is of the opinion that death occurred at about 1
A.M."
"It is difficult to speak exactly in these matters," said the doctor, "but I think I can
say definitely that death occurred between midnight and two in the morning."
"When was this M. Ratchett last seen alive?" asked Poirot.
"He is known to have been alive at about twenty minutes to one, when he spoke to
the conductor," said M. Bouc.
"That is quite correct," said Poirot. "I myself heard what passed.
That is the last thing known?" "Yes."
Poirot turned toward the doctor, who continued.
"The window of M. Ratchett's compartment was found wide open, leading one to
suppose that the murderer escaped that way. But in my opinion that open window
is a blind. Anyone departing that way would have left distinct traces in the snow.
There were none."
"The crime was discovered—when?" asked Poirot. "Michel!"
The Wagon Lit conductor sat up. His face still looked pale and
frightened.
"Tell this gentleman exactly what occurred," ordered M. Bouc. The man spoke
somewhat jerkily.
"The valet of this M. Ratchett, he tapped several times at the door this morning.
There was no answer. Then, half an hour ago, the restaurant car attendant came. He
wanted to know if Monsieur was taking déjeuner. It was eleven o'clock, you
comprehend.
"I open the door for him with my key. But there is a chain, too, and that is fastened.
There is no answer and it is very still in there, and cold—but cold. With the
window open and snow drifting in. I thought the gentleman had had a fit, perhaps.
I got the chef de train. We broke the chain and went in. He was—Ah! c'était
terrible!"
He buried his face in his hands again.
"The door was locked and chained on the inside," said Poirot thoughtfully. "It was
not suicide—eh?"
The Greek doctor gave a sardonic laugh. "Does a man who commits suicide stab
himself in ten—twelve—fifteen places?" he asked.
Poirot's eyes opened. "That is great ferocity," he said.
"It is a woman," said the chef de train, speaking for the first time. "Depend upon it,
it was a woman. Only a woman would stab like that."
Dr. Constantine screwed up his face thoughtfully.
"She must have been a very strong woman," he said. "It is not my desire to speak
technically—that is only confusing; but I can assure you that one or two of the
blows were delivered with such force as to drive them through hard belts of bone
and muscle."
"It was clearly not a scientific crime," said Poirot.
"It was most unscientific," returned Dr. Constantine. "The blows seem to have
been delivered haphazard and at random. Some have glanced off, doing hardly any
damage. It is as though somebody had shut his eyes and then in a frenzy struck
blindly again and again."
"C'est une femme," said the chef de train again. "Women are like that. When they
are enraged they have great strength." He nodded so sagely that everyone
suspected a personal experience of his own.
"I have, perhaps, something to contribute to your store of knowledge,"
said Poirot. "M. Ratchett spoke to me yesterday. He told me, as far as I was able to
understand him, that he was in danger of his life."
" 'Bumped off'—that is the American expression, is it not?" asked M. Bouc. "Then
it is not a woman. It is a 'gangster' or a 'gunman.' "
The chef de train looked pained at seeing his theory come to nought. "If so," said
Poirot, "it seems to have been done very amateurishly."
His tone expressed professional disapproval.
"There is a large American on the train,." said M. Bouc, pursuing his idea. "A
common-looking man with terrible clothes. He chews the gum, which I believe
is not done in good circles. You know whom I mean?"
The Wagon Lit conductor to whom he had appealed nodded.
"Oui, Monsieur, the No. 16. But it cannot have been he. I should have seen him
enter or leave the compartment."
"You might not. You might not. But we will go into that presently. The question is,
what to do?" He looked at Poirot.
Poirot looked back at him.
"Come, my friend," said M. Bouc. "You comprehend what I am about to ask of
you. I know your powers. Take command of this investigation! No, no, do not
refuse. See, to us it is serious—I speak for the Compagnie Internationale des
Wagons Lits. By the time the Jugo- Slavian police arrive, how simple if we can
present them with the solution! Otherwise delays, annoyances, a million and one
inconveniences. Perhaps, who knows, serious annoyance to innocent persons.
Instead—you solve the mystery! We say, 'A murder has occurred—this is the
criminal!'"
"And suppose I do not solve it?"
"Ah, mon cher!" M. Bouc's voice became positively caressing. "I know your
reputation. I know something of your methods. This is the ideal case for you. To
look up the antecedents of all these people, to discover their bona fides—all that
takes time and endless inconvenience. But have I not heard you say often that to
solve a case a man has only to lie back in his chair and think? Do that. Interview
the passengers on the train, view the body, examine what clues there are, and
then—well, I have faith in you! I am assured that it is no idle boast of yours. Lie
back and think—use (as I have heard you say so often) the little grey cells of the
mind—and you will know!"
He leaned forward, looking affectionately at the detective.
"Your faith touches me, my friend," said Poirot emotionally. "As you say, this
cannot be a difficult case. I myself last night—but we will not speak of that now.
In truth, this problem intrigues me. I was reflecting, not half an hour ago, that
many hours of boredom lay ahead whilst we are stuck here. And now—a problem
lies ready to my hand."
"You accept then?" said M. Bouc eagerly.
"C'est entendu. You place the matter in my hands." "Good—we are all at your
service."
"To begin with, I should like a plan of the Istanbul-Calais coach, with a note of the
people who occupied the several compartments, and I should also like to see their
passports and their tickets."
"Michel will get you those."
The Wagon Lit conductor left the compartment.
"What other passengers are there on the train?" asked Poirot.
"In this coach Dr. Constantine and I are the only travellers. In the coach from
Bucharest is an old gentleman with a lame leg. He is well known to the conductor.
Beyond that are the ordinary carriages, but these do not concern us, since they
were locked after dinner had been served last night. Forward of the Istanbul-Calais
coach there is only the dining-car."
"Then it seems," said Poirot slowly, "as though we must look for our
murderer in the Istanbul-Calais coach." He turned to the doctor. "That is what you
were hinting, I think?"
The Greek nodded. "At half an hour after midnight we ran into the snowdrift. No
one can have left the train since then."
M. Bouc said solemnly, "The murderer is with us—on the train now.
..."
