Once back under the starry sky, Harry heaved Dumbledore on to the top of the nearest boulder and then to his feet. Sodden and shivering, Dumbledore’s weight still upon him, Harry concentrated harder than he had ever done upon his destination: Hogsmeade. Closing his eyes, gripping Dumbledore’s arm as tightly as he could, he stepped forwards into that feeling of horrible compression.

He knew it had worked before he opened his eyes: the smell of salt, the sea breeze had gone. He and Dumbledore were shivering and dripping in the middle of the dark High Street in Hogsmeade. For one horrible moment Harry’s imagination showed him more Inferi creeping towards him around the sides of shops, but he blinked and saw that nothing was stirring; all was still, the darkness complete but for a few streetlamps and lit upper windows.

‘We did it, Professor!’ Harry whispered with difficulty; he suddenly realised that he had a searing stitch in his chest. ‘We did it! We got the Horcrux!’

Dumbledore staggered against him. For a moment, Harry thought that his inexpert Apparition had thrown Dumbledore off-balance; then he saw his face, paler and damper than ever in the distant light of a streetlamp.

‘Sir, are you all right?’

‘I’ve been better,’ said Dumbledore weakly, though the corners of his mouth twitched. ‘That potion … was no health drink …’

And to Harry’s horror, Dumbledore sank on to the ground.

‘Sir – it’s OK, sir, you’re going to be all right, don’t worry –’

He looked around desperately for help, but there was nobody to be seen and all he could think was that he must somehow get Dumbledore quickly to the hospital wing.

‘We need to get you up to the school, sir … Madam Pomfrey …’

‘No,’ said Dumbledore. ‘It is … Professor Snape whom I need … but I do not think … I can walk very far just yet …’

‘Right – sir, listen – I’m going to knock on a door, find a place you can stay – then I can run and get Madam –’

‘Severus,’ said Dumbledore clearly. ‘I need Severus …’

‘All right then, Snape – but I’m going to have to leave you for a moment so I can –’

Before Harry could make a move, however, he heard running footsteps. His heart leapt: somebody had seen, somebody knew they needed help – and looking around he saw Madam Rosmerta scurrying down the dark street towards them on high-heeled, fluffy slippers, wearing a silk dressing-gown embroidered with dragons.
‘I saw you Apparate as I was pulling my bedroom curtains! Thank goodness, thank goodness, I couldn’t think what to – but what’s wrong with Albus?’

She came to a halt, panting, and stared down, wide-eyed, at Dumbledore.

‘He’s hurt,’ said Harry. ‘Madam Rosmerta, can he come into the Three Broomsticks while I go up to the school and get help for him?’

‘You can’t go up there alone! Don’t you realise – haven’t you seen –?’

‘If you help me support him,’ said Harry, not listening to her, ‘I think we can get him inside –’

‘What has happened?’ asked Dumbledore. ‘Rosmerta, what’s wrong?’

‘The – the Dark Mark, Albus.’

And she pointed into the sky, in the direction of Hogwarts. Dread flooded Harry at the sound of the words … he turned and looked.

There it was, hanging in the sky above the school: the blazing green skull with a serpent tongue, the mark Death Eaters left behind whenever they had entered a building … wherever they had murdered …

‘When did it appear?’ asked Dumbledore, and his hand clenched painfully upon Harry’s shoulder as he struggled to his feet.

‘Must have been minutes ago, it wasn’t there when I put the cat out, but when I got upstairs –’

‘We need to return to the castle at once,’ said Dumbledore. ‘Rosmerta,’ and though he staggered a little, he seemed wholly in command of the situation, ‘we need transport – brooms –’

‘I’ve got a couple behind the bar,’ she said, looking very frightened. ‘Shall I run and fetch –?’

‘No, Harry can do it.’

Harry raised his wand at once.

‘Accio Rosmerta’s brooms.’

A second later they heard a loud bang as the front door of the pub burst open; two brooms had shot out into the street and were racing each other to Harry’s side, where they stopped dead, quivering slightly, at waist height.

‘Rosmerta, please send a message to the Ministry,’ said Dumbledore, as he mounted the broom nearest him. ‘It might be that nobody within Hogwarts has yet realised anything is wrong … Harry, put on your Invisibility Cloak.’

Harry pulled his Cloak out of his pocket and threw it over himself before mounting his broom; Madam Rosmerta was already tottering back towards her pub as Harry and Dumbledore kicked off from the ground and rose up into the air. As they sped towards the castle, Harry glanced sideways at Dumbledore, ready to grab him should he fall, but the sight of the Dark Mark seemed to have acted upon Dumbledore like a stimulant: he was bent low over his broom, his eyes fixed upon the Mark, his long silver hair and beard flying behind him in the night air. And Harry, too, looked ahead at the skull, and fear swelled inside him like a venomous bubble, compressing his lungs, driving all other discomfort from his mind …
How long had they been away? Had Ron, Hermione and Ginny’s luck run out by now? Was it one of them who had caused the Mark to be set over the school, or was it Neville, or Luna, or some other member of the DA? And if it was … he was the one who had told them to patrol the corridors, he had asked them to leave the safety of their beds … would he be responsible, again, for the death of a friend?

As they flew over the dark, twisting lane down which they had walked earlier, Harry heard, over the whistling of the night air in his ears, Dumbledore muttering in some strange language again. He thought he understood why as he felt his broom shudder for a moment when they flew over the boundary wall into the grounds: Dumbledore was undoing the enchantments he himself had set around the castle, so that they could enter at speed. The Dark Mark was glittering directly above the Astronomy Tower, the highest of the castle. Did that mean the death had occurred there?

Dumbledore had already crossed the crenellated ramparts and was dismounting; Harry landed next to him seconds later and looked around.

The ramparts were deserted. The door to the spiral staircase that led back into the castle was closed. There was no sign of a struggle, of a fight to the death, of a body.

‘What does it mean?’ Harry asked Dumbledore, looking up at the green skull with its serpent’s tongue glinting evilly above them. ‘Is it the real Mark? Has someone definitely been – Professor?’

In the dim green glow from the Mark Harry saw Dumbledore clutching at his chest with his blackened hand.

‘Go and wake Severus,’ said Dumbledore faintly but clearly. ‘Tell him what has happened and bring him to me. Do nothing else, speak to nobody else and do not remove your Cloak. I shall wait here.’

‘But –’

‘You swore to obey me, Harry – go!’

Harry hurried over to the door leading to the spiral staircase, but his hand had only just closed upon the iron ring of the door when he heard running footsteps on the other side. He looked round at Dumbledore, who gestured to him to retreat. Harry backed away, drawing his wand as he did so.

The door burst open and somebody erupted through it and shouted: ‘Expelliarmus!’
Harry’s body became instantly rigid and immobile, and he felt himself fall back against the Tower wall, propped like an unsteady statue, unable to move or speak. He could not understand how it had happened – Expelliarmus was not a Freezing Charm –

Then, by the light of the Mark, he saw Dumbledore’s wand flying in an arc over the edge of the ramparts and understood … Dumbledore had wordlessly immobilised Harry, and the second he had taken to perform the spell had cost him the chance of defending himself.

Standing against the ramparts, very white in the face, Dumbledore still showed no sign of panic or distress. He merely looked across at his disarmer and said, ‘Good evening, Draco.’

Malfoy stepped forwards, glancing around quickly to check that he and Dumbledore were alone. His eyes fell upon the second broom.

‘Who else is here?’

‘A question I might ask you. Or are you acting alone?’

Harry saw Malfoy’s pale eyes shift back to Dumbledore in the greenish glare of the Mark.

‘No,’ he said. ‘I’ve got back-up. There are Death Eaters here in your school tonight.’

‘Well, well,’ said Dumbledore, as though Malfoy was showing him an ambitious homework project. ‘Very good indeed. You found a way to let them in, did you?’

‘Yeah,’ said Malfoy, who was panting. ‘Right under your nose and you never realised!’

‘Ingenious,’ said Dumbledore. ‘Yet … forgive me … where are they now? You seem unsupported.’

‘They met some of your guard. They’re having a fight down below. They won’t be long … I came on ahead. I – I’ve got a job to do.’

‘Well, then, you must get on and do it, my dear boy,’ said Dumbledore softly.

There was silence. Harry stood imprisoned within his own invisible, paralysed body, staring at the two of them, his ears straining to hear sounds of the Death Eaters’ distant fight, and in front of him, Draco Malfoy did nothing but stare at Albus Dumbledore who, incredibly, smiled.

‘Draco, Draco, you are not a killer.’

‘How do you know?’ said Malfoy at once.

He seemed to realise how childish the words had sounded; Harry saw him flush in the Mark’s greenish light.

‘You don’t know what I’m capable of,’ said Malfoy more forcefully, ‘you don’t know what I’ve done!’

‘Oh, yes, I do,’ said Dumbledore mildly. ‘You almost killed Katie Bell and Ronald Weasley. You have been trying, with increasing desperation, to kill me all year. Forgive me, Draco, but they have been feeble attempts … so feeble, to be honest, that I wonder whether your heart has been really in it …’
‘It has been in it!’ said Malfoy vehemently. ‘I’ve been working on it all year, and tonight –’

Somewhere in the depths of the castle below Harry heard a muffled yell. Malfoy stiffened and glanced over his shoulder.

‘Somebody is putting up a good fight,’ said Dumbledore conversationally. ‘But you were saying … yes, you have managed to introduce Death Eaters into my school which, I admit, I thought impossible … how did you do it?’

But Malfoy said nothing: he was still listening to whatever was happening below and seemed almost as paralysed as Harry was.

‘Perhaps you ought to get on with the job alone,’ suggested Dumbledore. ‘What if your back-up has been thwarted by my guard? As you have perhaps realised, there are members of the Order of the Phoenix here tonight, too. And after all, you don’t really need help … I have no wand at the moment … I cannot defend myself.’

Malfoy merely stared at him.

‘I see,’ said Dumbledore kindly, when Malfoy neither moved nor spoke. ‘You are afraid to act until they join you.’

‘I’m not afraid!’ snarled Malfoy, though he still made no move to hurt Dumbledore. ‘It’s you who should be scared!’

‘But why? I don’t think you will kill me, Draco. Killing is not nearly as easy as the innocent believe … so tell me, while we wait for your friends … how did you smuggle them in here? It seems to have taken you a long time to work out how to do it.’

Malfoy looked as though he was fighting down the urge to shout, or to vomit. He gulped and took several deep breaths, glaring at Dumbledore, his wand pointing directly at the latter’s heart. Then, as though he could not help himself, he said, ‘I had to mend that broken Vanishing Cabinet that no one’s used for years. The one Montague got lost in last year.’

‘Aaaah.’

Dumbledore’s sigh was half a groan. He closed his eyes for a moment.

‘That was clever … there is a pair, I take it?’

‘The other’s in Borgin and Burkes,’ said Malfoy, ‘and they make a kind of passage between them. Montague told me that when he was stuck in the Hogwarts one, he was trapped in limbo but sometimes he could hear what was going on at school, and sometimes what was going on in the shop, as if the Cabinet was travelling between them, but he couldn’t make anyone hear him … in the end he managed to Apparate out, even though he’d never passed his test. He nearly died doing it. Everyone thought it was a really good story, but I was the only one who realised what it meant – even Borgin didn’t know – I was the one who realised there could be a way into Hogwarts through the Cabinets if I fixed the broken one.’
‘Very good,’ murmured Dumbledore. ‘So the Death Eaters were able to pass from Borgin and Burkes into the school to help you … a clever plan, a very clever plan … and, as you say, right under my nose …’

‘Yeah,’ said Malfoy who, bizarrely, seemed to draw courage and comfort from Dumbledore’s praise. ‘Yeah, it was!’

‘But there were times,’ Dumbledore went on, ‘weren’t there, when you were not sure you would succeed in mending the Cabinet? And you resorted to crude and badly judged measures such as sending me a cursed necklace that was bound to reach the wrong hands … poisoning mead there was only the slightest chance I might drink …’

‘Yeah, well, you still didn’t realise who was behind that stuff, did you?’ sneered Malfoy, as Dumbledore slid a little down the ramparts, the strength in his legs apparently fading, and Harry struggled fruitlessly, mutely, against the enchantment binding him.

‘As a matter of fact, I did,’ said Dumbledore. ‘I was sure it was you.’

‘Why didn’t you stop me, then?’ Malfoy demanded.

‘I tried, Draco. Professor Snape has been keeping watch over you on my orders –’

‘He hasn’t been doing your orders, he promised my mother –’

‘Of course that is what he would tell you, Draco, but –’

‘He’s a double-agent, you stupid old man, he isn’t working for you, you just think he is!’

‘We must agree to differ on that, Draco. It so happens that I trust Professor Snape –’

‘Well, you’re losing your grip, then!’ sneered Malfoy. ‘He’s been offering me plenty of help – wanting all the glory for himself – wanting a bit of the action – “What are you doing? Did you do the necklace, that was stupid, it could have blown everything –” But I haven’t told him what I’ve been doing in the Room of Requirement, he’s going to wake up tomorrow and it’ll all be over and he won’t be the Dark Lord’s favourite any more, he’ll be nothing compared to me, nothing!’

‘Very gratifying,’ said Dumbledore mildly. ‘We all like appreciation for our own hard work, of course … but you must have had an accomplice, all the same … someone in Hogsmeade, someone who was able to slip Katie the – the – aaaah …’

Dumbledore closed his eyes again and nodded, as though he was about to fall asleep.

‘… of course … Rosmerta. How long has she been under the Imperius Curse?’
‘Got there at last, have you?’ Malfoy taunted.

There was another yell from below, rather louder than the last. Malfoy looked nervously over his shoulder again, then back at Dumbledore, who went on, ‘So poor Rosmerta was forced to lurk in her own bathroom and pass that necklace to any Hogwarts student who entered the room unaccompanied? And the poisoned mead … well, naturally, Rosmerta was able to poison it for you before she sent the bottle to Slughorn, believing that it was to be my Christmas present … yes, very neat … very neat … poor Mr Filch would not, of course, think to check a bottle of Rosmerta’s … tell me, how have you been communicating with Rosmerta? I thought we had all methods of communication in and out of the school monitored.’

‘Enchanted coins,’ said Malfoy, as though he was compelled to keep talking, though his wand hand was shaking badly. ‘I had one and she had the other and I could send her messages –’

‘Isn’t that the secret method of communication the group that called themselves Dumbledore’s Army used last year?’ asked Dumbledore. His voice was light and conversational, but Harry saw him slip an inch lower down the wall as he said it.

‘Yeah, I got the idea from them,’ said Malfoy, with a twisted smile. ‘I got the idea of poisoning the mead from the Mudblood Granger, as well, I heard her talking in the library about Filch not recognising potions …’

‘Please do not use that offensive word in front of me,’ said Dumbledore.

Malfoy gave a harsh laugh.

‘You care about me saying “Mudblood” when I’m about to kill you?’

‘Yes, I do,’ said Dumbledore, and Harry saw his feet slide a little on the floor as he struggled to remain upright. ‘But as for being about to kill me, Draco, you have had several long minutes now. We are quite alone. I am more defenceless than you can have dreamed of finding me, and still you have not acted …’

Malfoy’s mouth contorted involuntarily, as though he had tasted something very bitter.

‘Now, about tonight,’ Dumbledore went on, ‘I am a little puzzled about how it happened … you knew that I had left the school? But of course,’ he answered his own question, ‘Rosmerta saw me leaving, she tipped you off using your ingenious coins, I’m sure …’
‘That’s right,’ said Malfoy. ‘But she said you were just going for a drink, you’d be back …’

‘Well, I certainly did have a drink … and I came back … after a fashion,’ mumbled Dumbledore. ‘So you decided to spring a trap for me?’

‘We decided to put the Dark Mark over the Tower and get you to hurry up here, to see who’d been killed,’ said Malfoy. ‘And it worked!’

‘Well … yes and no …’ said Dumbledore. ‘But am I to take it, then, that nobody has been murdered?’

‘Someone’s dead,’ said Malfoy and his voice seemed to go up an octave as he said it. ‘One of your people … I don’t know who, it was dark … I stepped over the body … I was supposed to be waiting up here when you got back, only your Phoenix lot got in the way …’

‘Yes, they do that,’ said Dumbledore.

There was a bang and shouts from below, louder than ever; it sounded as though people were fighting on the actual spiral staircase that led to where Dumbledore, Malfoy and Harry stood, and Harry’s heart thundered unheard in his invisible chest … someone was dead … Malfoy had stepped over the body … but who was it?

‘There is little time, one way or another,’ said Dumbledore. ‘So let us discuss your options, Draco.’

‘My options!’ said Malfoy loudly. ‘I’m standing here with a wand – I’m about to kill you –’

‘My dear boy, let us have no more pretence about that. If you were going to kill me, you would have done it when you first Disarmed me, you would not have stopped for this pleasant chat about ways and means.’

‘I haven’t got any options!’ said Malfoy, and he was suddenly as white as Dumbledore. ‘I’ve got to do it! He’ll kill me! He’ll kill my whole family!’

‘I appreciate the difficulty of your position,’ said Dumbledore. ‘Why else do you think I have not confronted you before now? Because I knew that you would have been murdered if Lord Voldemort realised that I suspected you.’

Malfoy winced at the sound of the name.

‘I did not dare speak to you of the mission with which I knew you had been entrusted, in case he used Legilimency against you,’ continued Dumbledore. ‘But now at last we can speak plainly to each other … no harm has been done, you have hurt nobody, though you are very lucky that your unintentional victims survived … I can help you, Draco.’
‘No, you can’t,’ said Malfoy, his wand hand shaking very badly indeed. ‘Nobody can. He told me to do it or he’ll kill me. I’ve got no choice.’

‘Come over to the right side, Draco, and we can hide you more completely than you can possibly imagine. What is more, I can send members of the Order to your mother tonight to hide her likewise. Your father is safe at the moment in Azkaban … when the time comes we can protect him too … come over to the right side, Draco … you are not a killer …’

Malfoy stared at Dumbledore.

‘But I got this far, didn’t I?’ he said slowly. ‘They thought I’d die in the attempt, but I’m here … and you’re in my power … I’m the one with the wand … you’re at my mercy …’

‘No, Draco,’ said Dumbledore quietly. ‘It is my mercy, and not yours, that matters now.’

Malfoy did not speak. His mouth was open, his wand hand still trembling. Harry thought he saw it drop by a fraction –

But suddenly footsteps were thundering up the stairs and a second later Malfoy was buffeted out of the way as four people in black robes burst through the door on to the ramparts. Still paralysed, his eyes staring unblinkingly, Harry gazed in terror upon four strangers: it seemed the Death Eaters had won the fight below.

A lumpy-looking man with an odd lopsided leer gave a wheezy giggle.

‘Dumbledore cornered!’ he said, and he turned to a stocky little woman who looked as though she could be his sister and who was grinning eagerly. ‘Dumbledore wandless, Dumbledore alone! Well done, Draco, well done!’

‘Good evening, Amycus,’ said Dumbledore calmly, as though welcoming the man to a tea party. ‘And you’ve brought Alecto too … charming …’

The woman gave an angry little titter.

‘Think your little jokes’ll help you on your death bed, then?’ she jeered.

‘Jokes? No, no, these are manners,’ replied Dumbledore.

‘Do it,’ said the stranger standing nearest to Harry, a big, rangy man with matted grey hair and whiskers, whose black Death Eater’s robes looked uncomfortably tight. He had a voice like none that Harry had ever heard: a rasping bark of a voice. Harry could smell a powerful mixture of dirt, sweat and, unmistakeably, of blood coming from him. His filthy hands had long yellowish nails.

‘Is that you, Fenrir?’ asked Dumbledore.
‘That’s right,’ rasped the other. ‘Pleased to see me, Dumbledore?’

‘No, I cannot say that I am …’

Fenrir Greyback grinned, showing pointed teeth. Blood trickled down his chin and he licked his lips slowly, obscenely.

‘But you know how much I like kids, Dumbledore.’

‘Am I to take it that you are attacking even without the full moon now? This is most unusual … you have developed a taste for human flesh that cannot be satisfied once a month?’

‘That’s right,’ said Greyback. ‘Shocks you, that, does it, Dumbledore? Frightens you?’

‘Well, I cannot pretend it does not disgust me a little,’ said Dumbledore. ‘And, yes, I am a little shocked that Draco here invited you, of all people, into the school where his friends live …’

‘I didn’t,’ breathed Malfoy. He was not looking at Greyback; he did not seem to want to even glance at him. ‘I didn’t know he was going to come –’

‘I wouldn’t want to miss a trip to Hogwarts, Dumbledore,’ rasped Greyback. ‘Not when there are throats to be ripped out … delicious, delicious …’

And he raised a yellow fingernail and picked at his front teeth, leering at Dumbledore.

‘I could do you for afters, Dumbledore …’

‘No,’ said the fourth Death Eater sharply. He had a heavy, brutal-looking face. ‘We’ve got orders. Draco’s got to do it. Now, Draco, and quickly.’

Malfoy was showing less resolution than ever. He looked terrified as he stared into Dumbledore’s face, which was even paler, and rather lower than usual, as he had slid so far down the rampart wall.

‘He’s not long for this world anyway, if you ask me!’ said the lopsided man, to the accompaniment of his sister’s wheezing giggles. ‘Look at him – what’s happened to you, then, Dumby?’

‘Oh, weaker resistance, slower reflexes, Amycus,’ said Dumbledore. ‘Old age, in short … one day, perhaps, it will happen to you … if you are lucky …’

‘What’s that mean, then, what’s that mean?’ yelled the Death Eater, suddenly violent. ‘Always the same, weren’t yeh, Dumby, talking and doing nothing, nothing, I don’t even know why the Dark Lord’s bothering to kill yeh! Come on, Draco, do it!’

But at that moment, there were renewed sounds of scuffling from below and a voice shouted, ‘They’ve blocked the stairs – Reducto! REDUCTO!’
Harry’s heart leapt: so these four had not eliminated all opposition, but merely broken through the fight to the top of the Tower, and, by the sound of it, created a barrier behind them –

‘Now, Draco, quickly!’ said the brutal-faced man angrily.

But Malfoy’s hand was shaking so badly that he could barely aim.

‘I’ll do it,’ snarled Greyback, moving towards Dumbledore with his hands outstretched, his teeth bared.

‘I said no!’ shouted the brutal-faced man; there was a flash of light and the werewolf was blasted out of the way; he hit the ramparts and staggered, looking furious. Harry’s heart was hammering so hard it seemed impossible that nobody could hear him standing there, imprisoned by Dumbledore’s spell – if he could only move, he could aim a curse from under the Cloak –

‘Draco, do it, or stand aside so one of us –’ screeched the woman, but at that precise moment the door to the ramparts burst open once more and there stood Snape, his wand clutched in his hand as his black eyes swept the scene, from Dumbledore slumped against the wall, to the four Death Eaters, including the enraged werewolf, and Malfoy.

‘We’ve got a problem, Snape,’ said the lumpy Amycus, whose eyes and wand were fixed alike upon Dumbledore, ‘the boy doesn’t seem able –’

But somebody else had spoken Snape’s name, quite softly.

‘Severus …’

The sound frightened Harry beyond anything he had experienced all evening. For the first time, Dumbledore was pleading.

Snape said nothing, but walked forwards and pushed Malfoy roughly out of the way. The three Death Eaters fell back without a word. Even the werewolf seemed cowed.

Snape gazed for a moment at Dumbledore, and there was revulsion and hatred etched in the harsh lines of his face.

‘Severus … please …’

Snape raised his wand and pointed it directly at Dumbledore.

‘Avada Kedavra!’

A jet of green light shot from the end of Snape’s wand and hit Dumbledore squarely in the chest. Harry’s scream of horror never left him; silent and unmoving, he was forced to watch as Dumbledore was blasted into the air: for a split second he seemed to hang suspended beneath the shining skull, and then he fell slowly backwards, like a great rag doll, over the battlements and out of sight.
Harry felt as though he, too, were hurtling through space; it had not happened … it could not have happened …

‘Out of here, quickly,’ said Snape.

He seized Malfoy by the scruff of the neck and forced him through the door ahead of the rest; Greyback and the squat brother and sister followed, the latter both panting excitedly. As they vanished through the door Harry realised he could move again; what was now holding him paralysed against the wall was not magic, but horror and shock. He threw the Invisibility Cloak aside as the brutal-faced Death Eater, last to leave the Tower top, was disappearing through the door.

‘Petrificus Totalus!’

The Death Eater buckled as though hit in the back with something solid, and fell to the ground, rigid as a waxwork, but he had barely hit the floor when Harry was clambering over him and running down the darkened staircase.

Terror tore at Harry’s heart … he had to get to Dumbledore and he had to catch Snape … somehow the two things were linked … he could reverse what had happened if he had them both together … Dumbledore could not have died …

He leapt the last ten steps of the spiral staircase and stopped where he landed, his wand raised: the dimly lit corridor was full of dust; half the ceiling seemed to have fallen in and a battle was raging before him, but even as he attempted to make out who was fighting whom, he heard the hated voice shout, ‘It’s over, time to go!’ and saw Snape disappearing round the corner at the far end of the corridor; he and Malfoy seemed to have forced their way through the fight unscathed. As Harry plunged after them, one of the fighters detached themself from the fray and flew at him: it was the werewolf, Greyback. He was on top of Harry before Harry could raise his wand: Harry fell backwards, with filthy matted hair in his face, the stench of sweat and blood filling his nose and mouth, hot greedy breath at his throat –

‘Petrificus Totalus!’

Harry felt Greyback collapse against him; with a stupendous effort he pushed the werewolf off and on to the floor as a jet of green light came flying towards him; he ducked and ran, headfirst, into the fight. His feet met something squashy and slippery on the floor and he stumbled: there were two bodies lying there, lying face down in a pool of blood, but there was no time to investigate: Harry now saw red hair flying like flames in front of him: Ginny was locked in combat with the lumpy Death Eater, Amycus, who was throwing hex after hex at her while she dodged them: Amycus was giggling, enjoying the sport: ‘Crucio – Crucio – you can’t dance for ever, pretty –’
‘Impedimenta!’ yelled Harry.

His jinx hit Amycus in the chest: he gave a piglike squeal of pain, was lifted off his feet and slammed into the opposite wall, slid down it and fell out of sight behind Ron, Professor McGonagall and Lupin, each of whom was battling a separate Death Eater: beyond them, Harry saw Tonks fighting an enormous blond wizard who was sending curses flying in all directions, so that they ricocheted off the walls around them, cracking stone, shattering the nearest window –

‘Harry, where did you come from?’ Ginny cried, but there was no time to answer her. He put his head down and sprinted forwards, narrowly avoiding a blast that erupted over his head, showering them all in bits of wall: Snape must not escape, he must catch up with Snape –

‘Take that!’ shouted Professor McGonagall, and Harry glimpsed the female Death Eater, Alecto, sprinting away down the corridor with her arms over her head, her brother right behind her. Harry launched himself after them, but his foot caught on something and next moment he was lying across someone’s legs: looking around, he saw Neville’s pale, round face flat against the floor.

‘Neville, are you –?’

‘’M’all right,’ muttered Neville, who was clutching his stomach, ‘Harry … Snape ’n’ Malfoy … ran past …’

‘I know, I’m on it!’ said Harry, aiming a hex from the floor at the enormous blond Death Eater who was causing most of the chaos: the man gave a howl of pain as the spell hit him in the face; he wheeled round, staggered and then pounded away after the brother and sister.

Harry scrambled up from the floor and began to sprint along the corridor, ignoring the bangs issuing from behind him, the yells of the others to come back, and the mute call of the figures on the ground, whose fate he did not yet know …

He skidded round the corner, his trainers slippery with blood; Snape had an immense head-start – was it possible that he had already entered the Cabinet in the Room of Requirement, or had the Order made steps to secure it, to prevent the Death Eaters retreating that way? He could hear nothing but his own pounding feet, his own hammering heart as he sprinted along the next empty corridor, but then spotted a bloody footprint which showed that at least one of the fleeing Death Eaters was heading towards the front doors – perhaps the Room of Requirement was indeed blocked –
He skidded round another corner and a curse flew past him; he dived behind a suit of armour which exploded; he saw the brother and sister Death Eaters running down the marble staircase ahead and aimed jinxes at them, but merely hit several bewigged witches in a portrait on the landing, who ran screeching into neighbouring paintings; as he leapt over the wreckage of armour Harry heard more shouts and screams; other people within the castle seemed to have awoken …

He pelted towards a short cut, hoping to overtake the brother and sister and close in on Snape and Malfoy, who must surely have reached the grounds by now; remembering to leap the vanishing step halfway down the concealed staircase he burst through a tapestry at the bottom and out into a corridor where a number of bewildered and pyjama-clad Hufflepuffs stood.

‘Harry! We heard a noise and someone said something about the Dark Mark –’ began Ernie Macmillan.

‘Out of the way!’ yelled Harry, knocking two boys aside as he sprinted towards the landing and down the remainder of the marble staircase. The oak front doors had been blasted open; there were smears of blood on the flagstones and several terrified students stood huddled against the walls, one or two still cowering with their arms over their faces; the giant Gryffindor hour-glass had been hit by a curse and the rubies within were still falling, with a loud rattle, on to the flagstones below …

Harry flew across the Entrance Hall and out into the dark grounds: he could just make out three figures racing across the lawn, heading for the gates beyond which they could Disapparate – by the looks of them, the huge blond Death Eater and, some way ahead of him, Snape and Malfoy …

The cold night air ripped at Harry’s lungs as he tore after them; he saw a flash of light in the distance that momentarily silhouetted his quarry; he did not know what it was but continued to run, not yet near enough to get a good aim with a curse –

Another flash, shouts, retaliatory jets of light, and Harry understood: Hagrid had emerged from his cabin and was trying to stop the Death Eaters escaping, and though every breath seemed to shred his lungs and the stitch in his chest was like fire, Harry sped up as an unbidden voice in his head said: not Hagrid … not Hagrid too …
Something caught Harry hard in the small of the back and he fell forwards, his face smacking the ground, blood pouring out of both nostrils: he knew, even as he rolled over, his wand ready, that the brother and sister he had overtaken using his short cut were closing in behind him …

‘Impedimenta!’ he yelled as he rolled over again, crouching close to the dark ground, and miraculously his jinx hit one of them, who stumbled and fell, tripping up the other; Harry leapt to his feet and sprinted on, after Snape …

And now he saw the vast outline of Hagrid, illuminated by the light of the crescent moon revealed suddenly from behind clouds; the blond Death Eater was aiming curse after curse at the gamekeeper, but Hagrid’s immense strength, and the toughened skin he had inherited from his giantess mother, seemed to be protecting him; Snape and Malfoy, however, were still running; they would soon be beyond the gates, able to Disapparate –

Harry tore past Hagrid and his opponent, took aim at Snape’s back and yelled, ‘Stupefy!’

He missed; the jet of red light soared past Snape’s head; Snape shouted, ‘Run, Draco!’ and turned; twenty yards apart he and Harry looked at each other before raising their wands simultaneously.

‘Cruc—’

But Snape parried the curse, knocking Harry backwards off his feet before he could complete it; Harry rolled over and scrambled back up again as the huge Death Eater behind him yelled, ‘Incendio!’; Harry heard an explosive bang and a dancing orange light spilled over all of them: Hagrid’s house was on fire.

‘Fang’s in there, yeh evil –!’ Hagrid bellowed.

‘Cruc—’ yelled Harry for the second time, aiming for the figure ahead illuminated in the dancing firelight, but Snape blocked the spell again; Harry could see him sneering.

‘No Unforgivable Curses from you, Potter!’ he shouted over the rushing of the flames, Hagrid’s yells and the wild yelping of the trapped Fang. ‘You haven’t got the nerve or the ability –’

‘Incarc—’ Harry roared, but Snape deflected the spell with an almost lazy flick of his arm.

‘Fight back!’ Harry screamed at him. ‘Fight back, you cowardly –’
‘Coward, did you call me, Potter?’ shouted Snape. ‘Your father would never attack me unless it was four on one, what would you call him, I wonder?’

‘Stupe—’

‘Blocked again, and again, and again until you learn to keep your mouth shut and your mind closed, Potter!’ sneered Snape, deflecting the curse once more. ‘Now come!’ he shouted at the huge Death Eater behind Harry. ‘It is time to be gone, before the Ministry turns up –’

‘Impedi—’

But before he could finish this jinx, excruciating pain hit Harry; he keeled over in the grass, someone was screaming, he would surely die of this agony, Snape was going to torture him to death or madness –

‘No!’ roared Snape’s voice and the pain stopped as suddenly as it had started; Harry lay curled on the dark grass, clutching his wand and panting; somewhere above him Snape was shouting, ‘Have you forgotten our orders? Potter belongs to the Dark Lord – we are to leave him! Go! Go!’

And Harry felt the ground shudder under his face as the brother and sister and the enormous Death Eater obeyed, running towards the gates. Harry uttered an inarticulate yell of rage: in that instant, he cared not whether he lived or died; pushing himself to his feet again, he staggered blindly towards Snape, the man he now hated as much as he hated Voldemort himself –

‘Sectum—’

Snape flicked his wand and the curse was repelled yet again; but Harry was mere feet away now and he could see Snape’s face clearly at last: he was no longer sneering or jeering; the blazing flames showed a face full of rage. Mustering all his powers of concentration, Harry thought, Levi—

‘No, Potter!’ screamed Snape. There was a loud BANG and Harry was soaring backwards, hitting the ground hard again, and this time his wand flew out of his hand. He could hear Hagrid yelling and Fang howling as Snape closed in and looked down on him where he lay, wandless and defenceless as Dumbledore had been. Snape’s pale face, illuminated by the flaming cabin, was suffused with hatred just as it had been before he had cursed Dumbledore.

‘You dare use my own spells against me, Potter? It was I who invented them – I, the Half-Blood Prince! And you’d turn my inventions on me, like your filthy father, would you? I don’t think so … no!’
Harry had dived for his wand; Snape shot a hex at it and it flew feet away into the darkness and out of sight.

‘Kill me, then,’ panted Harry, who felt no fear at all, but only rage and contempt. ‘Kill me like you killed him, you coward –’

‘DON’T –’ screamed Snape, and his face was suddenly demented, inhuman, as though he was in as much pain as the yelping, howling dog stuck in the burning house behind them, ‘– CALL ME COWARD!’

And he slashed at the air: Harry felt a white-hot, whiplike something hit him across the face and was slammed backwards into the ground. Spots of light burst in front of his eyes and for a moment all the breath seemed to have gone from his body, then he heard a rush of wings above him and something enormous obscured the stars: Buckbeak had flown at Snape, who staggered backwards as the razor-sharp claws slashed at him. As Harry raised himself into a sitting position, his head still swimming from its last contact with the ground, he saw Snape running as hard as he could, the enormous beast flapping behind him and screeching as Harry had never heard him screech –

Harry struggled to his feet, looking around groggily for his wand, hoping to give chase again, but even as his fingers fumbled in the grass, discarding twigs, he knew it would be too late, and sure enough, by the time he had located his wand he turned only to see the Hippogriff circling the gates: Snape had managed to Disapparate just beyond the school’s boundaries.

‘Hagrid,’ muttered Harry, still dazed, looking around. ‘HAGRID?’

He stumbled towards the burning house as an enormous figure emerged from out of the flames carrying Fang on his back. With a cry of thankfulness, Harry sank to his knees; he was shaking in every limb, his body ached all over and his breath came in painful stabs.

‘Yeh all righ’, Harry? Yeh all righ’? Speak ter me, Harry …’

Hagrid’s huge, hairy face was swimming above Harry, blocking out the stars. Harry could smell burnt wood and dog hair; he put out a hand and felt Fang’s reassuringly warm and alive body quivering beside him.

‘I’m all right,’ panted Harry. ‘Are you?’

‘Course I am … take more’n that ter finish me.’

Hagrid put his hands under Harry’s arms and raised him up with such force that Harry’s feet momentarily left the ground before Hagrid set him upright again. He could see blood trickling down Hagrid’s cheek from a deep cut under one eye, which was swelling rapidly.
‘We should put out your house,’ said Harry, ‘the charm’s Aguamenti …’

‘Knew it was summat like that,’ mumbled Hagrid, and he raised a smouldering, pink flowery umbrella and said, ‘Aguamenti!’

A jet of water flew out of the umbrella tip. Harry raised his wand arm, which felt like lead, and murmured ‘Aguamenti’ too: together, he and Hagrid poured water on the house until the last flame was extinguished.

‘’S not too bad,’ said Hagrid hopefully a few minutes later, looking at the smoking wreck. ‘Nothin’ Dumbledore won’ be able to put righ’ …’

Harry felt a searing pain in his stomach at the sound of the name. In the silence and the stillness, horror rose inside him.

‘Hagrid …’

‘I was bindin’ up a couple o’ Bowtruckle legs when I heard ’em comin’,’ said Hagrid sadly, still staring at his wrecked cabin. ‘They’ll’ve bin burnt ter twigs, poor little things …’

‘Hagrid …’

‘But what happened, Harry? I jus’ saw them Death Eaters runnin’ down from the castle, but what the ruddy hell was Snape doin’ with ’em? Where’s he gone – was he chasin’ ’em?’

‘He …’ Harry cleared his throat; it was dry from panic and the smoke. ‘Hagrid, he killed …’

‘Killed?’ said Hagrid loudly, staring down at Harry. ‘Snape killed? What’re yeh on abou’, Harry?’

‘Dumbledore,’ said Harry. ‘Snape killed … Dumbledore.’

Hagrid simply looked at him, the little of his face that could be seen completely blank, uncomprehending.

‘Dumbledore wha’, Harry?’

‘He’s dead. Snape killed him …’

‘Don’ say that,’ said Hagrid roughly. ‘Snape kill Dumbledore – don’ be stupid, Harry. Wha’s made yeh say tha’?’

‘I saw it happen.’

‘Yeh couldn’ have.’

‘I saw it, Hagrid.’

Hagrid shook his head; his expression was disbelieving but sympathetic and Harry knew that Hagrid thought he had sustained a blow to the head, that he was confused, perhaps by the after-effects of a jinx …

‘What musta happened was, Dumbledore musta told Snape ter go with them Death Eaters,’ Hagrid said confidently. ‘I suppose he’s gotta keep his cover. Look, let’s get yeh back up ter the school. Come on, Harry …’

Harry did not attempt to argue or explain. He was still shaking uncontrollably. Hagrid would find out soon enough, too soon … As they directed their steps back towards the castle, Harry saw that many of its windows were lit now: he could imagine, clearly, the scenes inside as people moved from room to room, telling each other that Death Eaters had got in, that the Mark was shining over Hogwarts, that somebody must have been killed …
The oak front doors stood open ahead of them, light flooding out on to the drive and the lawn. Slowly, uncertainly, dressing-gowned people were creeping down the steps, looking around nervously for some sign of the Death Eaters who had fled into the night. Harry’s eyes, however, were fixed upon the ground at the foot of the tallest tower. He imagined that he could see a black, huddled mass lying in the grass there, though he was really too far away to see anything of the sort. Even as he stared wordlessly at the place where he thought Dumbledore’s body must lie, however, he saw people beginning to move towards it.

‘What’re they all lookin’ at?’ said Hagrid, as he and Harry approached the castle front, Fang keeping as close as he could to their ankles. ‘Wha’s tha’, lyin’ on the grass?’ Hagrid added sharply, heading now towards the foot of the Astronomy Tower, where a small crowd was congregating. ‘See it, Harry? Righ’ at the foot o’ the Tower? Under where the Mark … blimey … yeh don’ think someone got thrown –?’

Hagrid fell silent, the thought apparently too horrible to express aloud. Harry walked alongside him, feeling the aches and pains in his face and his legs where the various hexes of the last half an hour had hit him, though in an oddly detached way, as though somebody near him was suffering them. What was real and inescapable was the awful pressing feeling in his chest …

He and Hagrid moved, dreamlike, through the murmuring crowd to the very front, where the dumbstruck students and teachers had left a gap.

Harry heard Hagrid’s moan of pain and shock, but he did not stop; he walked slowly forwards until he reached the place where Dumbledore lay, and crouched down beside him.

Harry had known there was no hope from the moment that the Body-Bind Curse Dumbledore had placed upon him lifted, known that it could have happened only because its caster was dead; but there was still no preparation for seeing him here, spread-eagled, broken: the greatest wizard Harry had ever, or would ever, meet.

Dumbledore’s eyes were closed; but for the strange angle of his arms and legs, he might have been sleeping. Harry reached out, straightened the half-moon spectacles upon the crooked nose and wiped a trickle of blood from the mouth with his own sleeve. Then he gazed down at the wise old face and tried to absorb the enormous and incomprehensible truth: that never again would Dumbledore speak to him, never again could he help …
The crowd murmured behind Harry. After what seemed like a long time he became aware that he was kneeling upon something hard and looked down.

The locket they had managed to steal so many hours before had fallen out of Dumbledore’s pocket. It had opened, perhaps due to the force with which it had hit the ground. And although he could not feel more shock or horror or sadness than he felt already, Harry knew, as he picked it up, that there was something wrong …

He turned the locket over in his hands. This was neither as large as the locket he remembered seeing in the Pensieve, nor were there any markings upon it, no sign of the ornate S that was supposed to be Slytherin’s mark. Moreover, there was nothing inside but for a scrap of folded parchment wedged tightly into the place where a portrait should have been.

Automatically, without really thinking about what he was doing, Harry pulled out the fragment of parchment, opened it, and read by the light of the many wands that had now been lit behind him:

 

To the Dark Lord

I know I will be dead long before you read this but I want you to know that it was I who discovered your secret. I have stolen the real Horcrux and intend to destroy it as soon as I can. I face death in the hope that when you meet your match, you will be mortal once more.

R.A.B.

 

Harry neither knew nor cared what the message meant. Only one thing mattered: this was not a Horcrux. Dumbledore had weakened himself by drinking that terrible potion for nothing. Harry crumpled the parchment in his hand and his eyes burned with tears as behind him Fang began to howl.
‘C’mere, Harry …’

‘No.’

‘You can’ stay here, Harry … come on, now …’

‘No.’

He did not want to leave Dumbledore’s side, he did not want to move anywhere. Hagrid’s hand on his shoulder was trembling. Then another voice said, ‘Harry, come on.’

A much smaller and warmer hand had enclosed his and was pulling him upwards. He obeyed its pressure without really thinking about it. Only as he walked blindly back through the crowd did he realise, from a trace of flowery scent on the air, that it was Ginny who was leading him back into the castle. Incomprehensible voices battered him, sobs and shouts and wails stabbed the night, but Harry and Ginny walked on, back up the steps into the Entrance Hall: faces swam on the edges of Harry’s vision, people were peering at him, whispering, wondering, and Gryffindor rubies glistened on the floor like drops of blood as they made their way towards the marble staircase.

‘We’re going to the hospital wing,’ said Ginny.

‘I’m not hurt,’ said Harry.

‘It’s McGonagall’s orders,’ said Ginny. ‘Everyone’s up there, Ron and Hermione and Lupin and everyone –’

Fear stirred in Harry’s chest again: he had forgotten the inert figures he had left behind.

‘Ginny, who else is dead?’

‘Don’t worry, none of us.’

‘But the Dark Mark – Malfoy said he stepped over a body –’

‘He stepped over Bill, but it’s all right, he’s alive.’

There was something in her voice, however, that Harry knew boded ill.

‘Are you sure?’

‘Of course I’m sure … he’s a – a bit of a mess, that’s all. Greyback attacked him. Madam Pomfrey says he won’t – won’t look the same any more …’ Ginny’s voice trembled a little. ‘We don’t really know what the after-effects will be – I mean, Greyback being a werewolf, but not transformed at the time.’

‘But the others … there were other bodies on the ground …’

‘Neville’s in the hospital wing, but Madam Pomfrey thinks he’ll make a full recovery, and Professor Flitwick was knocked out, but he’s all right, just a bit shaky. He insisted on going off to look after the Ravenclaws. And a Death Eater’s dead, he got hit by a Killing Curse the huge blond one was firing off everywhere – Harry, if we hadn’t had your Felix potion, I think we’d all have been killed, but everything seemed to just miss us –’
They had reached the hospital wing: pushing open the doors, Harry saw Neville lying, apparently asleep, in a bed near the door. Ron, Hermione, Luna, Tonks and Lupin were gathered around another bed near the far end of the ward. At the sound of the doors opening, they all looked up. Hermione ran to Harry and hugged him; Lupin moved forwards too, looking anxious.

‘Are you all right, Harry?’

‘I’m fine … how’s Bill?’

Nobody answered. Harry looked over Hermione’s shoulder and saw an unrecognisable face lying on Bill’s pillow, so badly slashed and ripped that he looked grotesque. Madam Pomfrey was dabbing at his wounds with some harsh-smelling green ointment. Harry remembered how Snape had mended Malfoy’s Sectumsempra wounds so easily with his wand.

‘Can’t you fix them with a charm or something?’ he asked the matron.

‘No charm will work on these,’ said Madam Pomfrey. ‘I’ve tried everything I know, but there is no cure for werewolf bites.’

‘But he wasn’t bitten at the full moon,’ said Ron, who was gazing down into his brother’s face as though he could somehow force him to mend just by staring. ‘Greyback hadn’t transformed, so surely Bill won’t be a – a real –?’

He looked uncertainly at Lupin.

‘No, I don’t think that Bill will be a true werewolf,’ said Lupin, ‘but that does not mean that there won’t be some contamination. Those are cursed wounds. They are unlikely ever to heal fully, and – and Bill might have some wolfish characteristics from now on.’

‘Dumbledore might know something that’d work, though,’ Ron said. ‘Where is he? Bill fought those maniacs on Dumbledore’s orders, Dumbledore owes him, he can’t leave him in this state –’

‘Ron – Dumbledore’s dead,’ said Ginny.

‘No!’ Lupin looked wildly from Ginny to Harry, as though hoping the latter might contradict her, but when Harry did not, Lupin collapsed into a chair beside Bill’s bed, his hands over his face. Harry had never seen Lupin lose control before; he felt as though he was intruding upon something private, indecent; he turned away and caught Ron’s eye instead, exchanging in silence a look that confirmed what Ginny had said.

‘How did he die?’ whispered Tonks. ‘How did it happen?’

‘Snape killed him,’ said Harry. ‘I was there, I saw it. We arrived back on the Astronomy Tower because that’s where the Mark was … Dumbledore was ill, he was weak, but I think he realised it was a trap when we heard footsteps running up the stairs. He immobilised me, I couldn’t do anything, I was under the Invisibility Cloak – and then Malfoy came through the door and Disarmed him –’
Hermione clapped her hands to her mouth, and Ron groaned. Luna’s mouth trembled.

‘– more Death Eaters arrived – and then Snape – and Snape did it. The Avada Kedavra.’ Harry couldn’t go on.

Madam Pomfrey burst into tears. Nobody paid her any attention except Ginny, who whispered, ‘Shh! Listen!’

Gulping, Madam Pomfrey pressed her fingers to her mouth, her eyes wide. Somewhere out in the darkness, a phoenix was singing in a way Harry had never heard before: a stricken lament of terrible beauty. And Harry felt, as he had felt about phoenix song before, that the music was inside him, not without: it was his own grief turned magically to song that echoed across the grounds and through the castle windows.

How long they all stood there, listening, he did not know, nor why it seemed to ease their pain a little to listen to the sound of their mourning, but it felt like a long time later that the hospital door opened again and Professor McGonagall entered the ward. Like all the rest, she bore marks of the recent battle: there were grazes on her face and her robes were ripped.

‘Molly and Arthur are on their way,’ she said, and the spell of the music was broken: everyone roused themselves as though coming out of trances, turning again to look at Bill, or else to rub their own eyes, shake their heads. ‘Harry, what happened? According to Hagrid you were with Professor Dumbledore when he – when it happened. He says Professor Snape was involved in some –’

‘Snape killed Dumbledore,’ said Harry.

She stared at him for a moment, then swayed alarmingly; Madam Pomfrey, who seemed to have pulled herself together, ran forwards, conjuring a chair from thin air, which she pushed under McGonagall.

‘Snape,’ repeated McGonagall faintly, falling into the chair. ‘We all wondered … but he trusted … always … Snape … I can’t believe it …’

‘Snape was a highly accomplished Occlumens,’ said Lupin, his voice uncharacteristically harsh. ‘We always knew that.’

‘But Dumbledore swore he was on our side!’ whispered Tonks. ‘I always thought Dumbledore must know something about Snape that we didn’t …’

‘He always hinted that he had an iron-clad reason for trusting Snape,’ muttered Professor McGonagall, now dabbing at the corners of her leaking eyes with a tartan-edged handkerchief. ‘I mean … with Snape’s history … of course people were bound to wonder … but Dumbledore told me explicitly that Snape’s repentance was absolutely genuine … wouldn’t hear a word against him!’
‘I’d love to know what Snape told him to convince him,’ said Tonks.

‘I know,’ said Harry, and they all turned to stare at him. ‘Snape passed Voldemort the information that made Voldemort hunt down my mum and dad. Then Snape told Dumbledore he hadn’t realised what he was doing, he was really sorry he’d done it, sorry that they were dead.’

‘And Dumbledore believed that?’ said Lupin incredulously. ‘Dumbledore believed Snape was sorry James was dead? Snape hated James …’

‘And he didn’t think my mother was worth a damn, either,’ said Harry, ‘because she was Muggle-born … “Mudblood”, he called her …’

Nobody asked how Harry knew this. All of them seemed to be lost in horrified shock, trying to digest the monstrous truth of what had happened.

‘This is all my fault,’ said Professor McGonagall suddenly. She looked disorientated, twisting her wet handkerchief in her hands. ‘My fault. I sent Filius to fetch Snape tonight, I actually sent for him to come and help us! If I hadn’t alerted Snape to what was going on, he might never have joined forces with the Death Eaters. I don’t think he knew they were there before Filius told him, I don’t think he knew they were coming.’

‘It isn’t your fault, Minerva,’ said Lupin firmly. ‘We all wanted more help, we were glad to think Snape was on his way …’

‘So when he arrived at the fight, he joined in on the Death Eaters’ side?’ asked Harry, who wanted every detail of Snape’s duplicity and infamy, feverishly collecting more reasons to hate him, to swear vengeance.

‘I don’t know exactly how it happened,’ said Professor McGonagall distractedly. ‘It’s all so confusing … Dumbledore had told us that he would be leaving the school for a few hours and that we were to patrol the corridors just in case … Remus, Bill and Nymphadora were to join us … and so we patrolled. All seemed quiet. Every secret passageway out of the school was covered. We knew nobody could fly in. There were powerful enchantments on every entrance into the castle. I still don’t know how the Death Eaters can possibly have entered …’

‘I do,’ said Harry, and he explained, briefly, about the pair of Vanishing Cabinets and the magical pathway they formed. ‘So they got in through the Room of Requirement.’
Almost against his will he glanced from Ron to Hermione, both of whom looked devastated.

‘I messed up, Harry,’ said Ron bleakly. ‘We did like you told us: we checked the Marauder’s Map and we couldn’t see Malfoy on it, so we thought he must be in the Room of Requirement, so me, Ginny and Neville went to keep watch on it … but Malfoy got past us.’

‘He came out of the Room about an hour after we started keeping watch,’ said Ginny. ‘He was on his own, clutching that awful shrivelled arm –’

‘His Hand of Glory,’ said Ron. ‘Gives light only to the holder, remember?’

‘Anyway,’ Ginny went on, ‘he must have been checking whether the coast was clear to let the Death Eaters out, because the moment he saw us he threw something into the air and it all went pitch black –’

‘– Peruvian Instant Darkness Powder,’ said Ron bitterly. ‘Fred and George’s. I’m going to be having a word with them about who they let buy their products.’

‘We tried everything – Lumos, Incendio,’ said Ginny. ‘Nothing would penetrate the darkness; all we could do was grope our way out of the corridor again, and meanwhile we could hear people rushing past us. Obviously Malfoy could see because of that Hand thing and was guiding them, but we didn’t dare use any curses or anything in case we hit each other, and by the time we’d reached a corridor that was light, they’d gone.’

‘Luckily,’ said Lupin hoarsely, ‘Ron, Ginny and Neville ran into us almost immediately and told us what had happened. We found the Death Eaters minutes later, heading in the direction of the Astronomy Tower. Malfoy obviously hadn’t expected more people to be on the watch; he seemed to have exhausted his supply of Darkness Powder, at any rate. A fight broke out, they scattered and we gave chase. One of them, Gibbon, broke away and headed up the Tower stairs –’

‘To set off the Mark?’ asked Harry.

‘He must have done, yes, they must have arranged that before they left the Room of Requirement,’ said Lupin. ‘But I don’t think Gibbon liked the idea of waiting up there alone for Dumbledore, because he came running back downstairs to rejoin the fight and was hit by a Killing Curse that just missed me.’

‘So if Ron was watching the Room of Requirement with Ginny and Neville,’ said Harry, turning to Hermione, ‘were you –?’
‘Outside Snape’s office, yes,’ whispered Hermione, her eyes sparkling with tears, ‘with Luna. We hung around for ages outside it and nothing happened … we didn’t know what was going on upstairs, Ron had taken the Marauder’s Map … it was nearly midnight when Professor Flitwick came sprinting down into the dungeons. He was shouting about Death Eaters in the castle, I don’t think he really registered that Luna and I were there at all, he just burst his way into Snape’s office and we heard him saying that Snape had to go back with him and help and then we heard a loud thump and Snape came hurtling out of his room and he saw us and – and –’

‘What?’ Harry urged her.

‘I was so stupid, Harry!’ said Hermione in a high-pitched whisper. ‘He said Professor Flitwick had collapsed and that we should go and take care of him while he – while he went to help fight the Death Eaters –’

She covered her face in shame and continued to talk into her fingers, so that her voice was muffled.

‘We went into his office to see if we could help Professor Flitwick and found him unconscious on the floor … and, oh, it’s so obvious now, Snape must have Stupefied Flitwick, but we didn’t realise, Harry, we didn’t realise, we just let Snape go!’

‘It’s not your fault,’ said Lupin firmly. ‘Hermione, had you not obeyed Snape and got out of the way, he would probably have killed you and Luna.’

‘So then he came upstairs,’ said Harry, who in his mind’s eye was watching Snape running up the marble staircase, his black robes billowing behind him as ever, pulling his wand from under his cloak as he ascended, ‘and he found the place where you were all fighting …’

‘We were in trouble, we were losing,’ said Tonks in a low voice. ‘Gibbon was down, but the rest of the Death Eaters seemed ready to fight to the death. Neville had been hurt, Bill had been savaged by Greyback … it was all dark … curses flying everywhere … the Malfoy boy had vanished, he must have slipped past, up the stairs to the Tower … then more of them ran after him, but one of them blocked the stairs behind them with some kind of curse … Neville ran at it and got thrown up into the air –’

‘None of us could break through,’ said Ron, ‘and that massive Death Eater was still firing off jinxes all over the place, they were bouncing off the walls and barely missing us …’
‘And then Snape was there,’ said Tonks, ‘and then he wasn’t –’

‘I saw him running towards us, but that huge Death Eater’s jinx just missed me right afterwards and I ducked and lost track of things,’ said Ginny.

‘I saw him run straight through the cursed barrier as though it wasn’t there,’ said Lupin. ‘I tried to follow him but was thrown back just like Neville …’

‘He must have known a spell we didn’t,’ whispered McGonagall. ‘After all – he was the Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher … I just assumed that he was in a hurry to chase after the Death Eaters who’d escaped up to the Tower …’

‘He was,’ said Harry savagely, ‘but to help them, not to stop them … and I’ll bet you had to have a Dark Mark to get through that barrier – so what happened when he came back down?’

‘Well, the big Death Eater had just fired off a hex that caused half the ceiling to fall in, and also broke the curse blocking the stairs,’ said Lupin. ‘We all ran forwards – those of us who were still standing, anyway – and then Snape and the boy emerged out of the dust – obviously, none of us attacked them –’

‘We just let them pass,’ said Tonks in a hollow voice, ‘we thought they were being chased by the Death Eaters – and next thing, the other Death Eaters and Greyback were back and we were fighting again – I thought I heard Snape shout something, but I don’t know what –’

‘He shouted, “It’s over,”’ said Harry. ‘He’d done what he’d meant to do.’

They all fell silent. Fawkes’s lament was still echoing over the dark grounds outside. As the music reverberated upon the air, unbidden, unwelcome thoughts slunk into Harry’s mind … had they taken Dumbledore’s body from the foot of the Tower yet? What would happen to it next? Where would it rest? He clenched his fists tightly in his pockets. He could feel the small cold lump of the fake Horcrux against the knuckles of his right hand.

The doors of the hospital wing burst open, making them all jump: Mr and Mrs Weasley were striding up the ward, Fleur just behind them, her beautiful face terrified.

‘Molly – Arthur –’ said Professor McGonagall, jumping up and hurrying to greet them. ‘I am so sorry –’

‘Bill,’ whispered Mrs Weasley, darting past Professor McGonagall as she caught sight of Bill’s mangled face. ‘Oh, Bill!’
Lupin and Tonks had got up hastily and retreated so that Mr and Mrs Weasley could get nearer to the bed. Mrs Weasley bent over her son and pressed her lips to his bloody forehead.

‘You said Greyback attacked him?’ Mr Weasley asked Professor McGonagall distractedly. ‘But he hadn’t transformed? So what does that mean? What will happen to Bill?’

‘We don’t yet know,’ said Professor McGonagall, looking helplessly at Lupin.

‘There will probably be some contamination, Arthur,’ said Lupin. ‘It is an odd case, possibly unique … we don’t know what his behaviour might be like when he wakes up …’

Mrs Weasley took the nasty-smelling ointment from Madam Pomfrey and began dabbing at Bill’s wounds.

‘And Dumbledore …’ said Mr Weasley. ‘Minerva, is it true … is he really …?’

As Professor McGonagall nodded, Harry felt Ginny move beside him and looked at her. Her slightly narrowed eyes were fixed upon Fleur, who was gazing down at Bill with a frozen expression on her face.

‘Dumbledore gone,’ whispered Mr Weasley, but Mrs Weasley had eyes only for her eldest son; she began to sob, tears falling on to Bill’s mutilated face.

‘Of course, it doesn’t matter how he looks … it’s not r – really important … but he was a very handsome little b – boy … always very handsome … and he was g – going to be married!’

‘And what do you mean by zat?’ said Fleur suddenly and loudly. ‘What do you mean, ’e was going to be married?’

Mrs Weasley raised her tear-stained face, looking startled.

‘Well – only that –’

‘You theenk Bill will not wish to marry me any more?’ demanded Fleur. ‘You theenk, because of these bites, he will not love me?’

‘No, that’s not what I –’

‘Because ’e will!’ said Fleur, drawing herself up to her full height and throwing back her long mane of silver hair. ‘It would take more zan a werewolf to stop Bill loving me!’

‘Well, yes, I’m sure,’ said Mrs Weasley, ‘but I thought perhaps – given how – how he –’

‘You thought I would not weesh to marry him? Or per’aps, you ’oped?’ said Fleur, her nostrils flaring. ‘What do I care how ’e looks? I am good-looking enough for both of us, I theenk! All these scars show is zat my husband is brave! And I shall do zat!’ she added fiercely, pushing Mrs Weasley aside and snatching the ointment from her.
Mrs Weasley fell back against her husband and watched Fleur mopping up Bill’s wounds with a most curious expression upon her face. Nobody said anything; Harry did not dare move. Like everybody else, he was waiting for the explosion.

‘Our Great Auntie Muriel,’ said Mrs Weasley after a long pause, ‘has a very beautiful tiara – goblin-made – which I am sure I could persuade her to lend you for the wedding. She is very fond of Bill, you know, and it would look lovely with your hair.’

‘Thank you,’ said Fleur stiffly. ‘I am sure zat will be lovely.’

And then – Harry did not quite see how it happened – both women were crying and hugging each other. Completely bewildered, wondering whether the world had gone mad, he turned round: Ron looked as stunned as Harry felt and Ginny and Hermione were exchanging startled looks.

‘You see!’ said a strained voice. Tonks was glaring at Lupin. ‘She still wants to marry him, even though he’s been bitten! She doesn’t care!’

‘It’s different,’ said Lupin, barely moving his lips and looking suddenly tense. ‘Bill will not be a full werewolf. The cases are completely –’

‘But I don’t care either, I don’t care!’ said Tonks, seizing the front of Lupin’s robes and shaking them. ‘I’ve told you a million times …’

And the meaning of Tonks’s Patronus and her mouse-coloured hair, and the reason she had come running to find Dumbledore when she had heard a rumour someone had been attacked by Greyback, all suddenly became clear to Harry; it had not been Sirius that Tonks had fallen in love with after all …

‘And I’ve told you a million times,’ said Lupin, refusing to meet her eyes, staring at the floor, ‘that I am too old for you, too poor … too dangerous …’

‘I’ve said all along you’re taking a ridiculous line on this, Remus,’ said Mrs Weasley over Fleur’s shoulder as she patted her on the back.

‘I am not being ridiculous,’ said Lupin steadily. ‘Tonks deserves somebody young and whole.’

‘But she wants you,’ said Mr Weasley, with a small smile. ‘And after all, Remus, young and whole men do not necessarily remain so.’ He gestured sadly at his son, lying between them.

‘This is … not the moment to discuss it,’ said Lupin, avoiding everybody’s eyes as he looked around distractedly. ‘Dumbledore is dead …’
‘Dumbledore would have been happier than anybody to think that there was a little more love in the world,’ said Professor McGonagall curtly, just as the hospital doors opened again and Hagrid walked in.

The little of his face that was not obscured by hair or beard was soaking and swollen; he was shaking with tears, a vast spotted handkerchief in his hand.

‘I’ve … I’ve done it, Professor,’ he choked. ‘M – moved him. Professor Sprout’s got the kids back in bed. Professor Flitwick’s lyin’ down but he says he’ll be all right in a jiffy, an’ Professor Slughorn says the Ministry’s bin informed.’

‘Thank you, Hagrid,’ said Professor McGonagall, standing up at once and turning to look at the group around Bill’s bed. ‘I shall have to see the Ministry when they get here. Hagrid, please tell the Heads of House – Slughorn can represent Slytherin – that I want to see them in my office forthwith. I would like you to join us, too.’

As Hagrid nodded, turned and shuffled out of the room again, she looked down at Harry.

‘Before I meet them I would like a quick word with you, Harry. If you’ll come with me …’

Harry stood up, murmured, ‘See you in a bit,’ to Ron, Hermione and Ginny, and followed Professor McGonagall back down the ward. The corridors outside were deserted and the only sound was the distant phoenix song. It was several minutes before Harry became aware that they were not heading for Professor McGonagall’s office, but for Dumbledore’s, and another few seconds before he realised that, of course, she had been Deputy Headmistress … apparently she was now Headmistress … so the room behind the gargoyle was now hers …

In silence they ascended the moving spiral staircase and entered the circular office. He did not know what he had expected: that the room would be draped in black, perhaps, or even that Dumbledore’s body might be lying there. In fact, it looked almost exactly as it had done when he and Dumbledore had left it mere hours previously: the silver instruments whirring and puffing on their spindle-legged tables, Gryffindor’s sword in its glass case gleaming in the moonlight, the Sorting Hat on a shelf behind the desk. But Fawkes’s perch stood empty; he was still crying his lament to the grounds. And a new portrait had joined the ranks of the dead headmasters and headmistresses of Hogwarts … Dumbledore was slumbering in a golden frame over the desk, his half-moon spectacles perched upon his crooked nose, looking peaceful and untroubled.
After glancing once at this portrait, Professor McGonagall made an odd movement as though steeling herself, then rounded the desk to look at Harry, her face taut and lined.

‘Harry,’ she said, ‘I would like to know what you and Professor Dumbledore were doing this evening when you left the school.’

‘I can’t tell you that, Professor,’ said Harry. He had expected the question and had his answer ready. It had been here, in this very room, that Dumbledore had told him that he was to confide the contents of their lessons to nobody but Ron and Hermione.

‘Harry, it might be important,’ said Professor McGonagall.

‘It is,’ said Harry, ‘very, but he didn’t want me to tell anyone.’

Professor McGonagall glared at him.

‘Potter’ (Harry registered the renewed use of his surname) ‘in the light of Professor Dumbledore’s death, I think you must see that the situation has changed somewhat –’

‘I don’t think so,’ said Harry, shrugging. ‘Professor Dumbledore never told me to stop following his orders if he died.’

‘But –’

‘There’s one thing you should know before the Ministry gets here, though. Madam Rosmerta’s under the Imperius Curse, she was helping Malfoy and the Death Eaters, that’s how the necklace and the poisoned mead –’

‘Rosmerta?’ said Professor McGonagall incredulously, but before she could go on, there was a knock on the door behind them and Professors Sprout, Flitwick and Slughorn traipsed into the room, followed by Hagrid, who was still weeping copiously, his huge frame trembling with grief.

‘Snape!’ ejaculated Slughorn, who looked the most shaken, pale and sweating. ‘Snape! I taught him! I thought I knew him!’

But before any of them could respond to this, a sharp voice spoke from high on the wall: a sallow-faced wizard with a short black fringe had just walked back into his empty canvas.

‘Minerva, the Minister will be here within seconds, he has just Disapparated from the Ministry.’

‘Thank you, Everard,’ said Professor McGonagall, and she turned quickly to her teachers.

‘I want to talk about what happens to Hogwarts before he gets here,’ she said quickly. ‘Personally, I am not convinced that the school should reopen next year. The death of the Headmaster at the hands of one of our colleagues is a terrible stain upon Hogwarts’ history. It is horrible.’
‘I am sure Dumbledore would have wanted the school to remain open,’ said Professor Sprout. ‘I feel that if a single pupil wants to come, then the school ought to remain open for that pupil.’

‘But will we have a single pupil after this?’ said Slughorn, now dabbing his sweating brow with a silken handkerchief. ‘Parents will want to keep their children at home and I can’t say I blame them. Personally, I don’t think we’re in more danger at Hogwarts than we are anywhere else, but you can’t expect mothers to think like that. They’ll want to keep their families together, it’s only natural.’

‘I agree,’ said Professor McGonagall. ‘And in any case, it is not true to say that Dumbledore never envisaged a situation in which Hogwarts might close. When the Chamber of Secrets reopened he considered the closure of the school – and I must say that Professor Dumbledore’s murder is more disturbing to me than the idea of Slytherin’s monster living undetected in the bowels of the castle …’

‘We must consult the governors,’ said Professor Flitwick in his squeaky little voice; he had a large bruise on his forehead but seemed otherwise unscathed by his collapse in Snape’s office. ‘We must follow the established procedures. A decision should not be made hastily.’

‘Hagrid, you haven’t said anything,’ said Professor McGonagall. ‘What are your views, ought Hogwarts to remain open?’

Hagrid, who had been weeping silently into his large spotted handkerchief throughout this conversation, now raised puffy red eyes and croaked, ‘I dunno, Professor … that’s fer the Heads of House an’ the Headmistress ter decide …’

‘Professor Dumbledore always valued your views,’ said Professor McGonagall kindly, ‘and so do I.’

‘Well, I’m stayin’,’ said Hagrid, fat tears still leaking out of the corners of his eyes and trickling down into his tangled beard. ‘It’s me home, it’s bin me home since I was thirteen. An’ if there’s kids who wan’ me ter teach ’em, I’ll do it. But … I dunno … Hogwarts without Dumbledore …’

He gulped and disappeared behind his handkerchief once more, and there was silence.

‘Very well,’ said Professor McGonagall, glancing out of the window at the grounds, checking to see whether the Minister was yet approaching, ‘then I must agree with Filius that the right thing to do is to consult the governors, who will take the final decision.
‘Now, as to getting students home … there is an argument for doing it sooner rather than later. We could arrange for the Hogwarts Express to come tomorrow if necessary –’

‘What about Dumbledore’s funeral?’ said Harry, speaking at last.

‘Well …’ said Professor McGonagall, losing a little of her briskness as her voice shook, ‘I – I know that it was Dumbledore’s wish to be laid to rest here, at Hogwarts –’

‘Then that’s what’ll happen, isn’t it?’ said Harry fiercely.

‘If the Ministry thinks it appropriate,’ said Professor McGonagall. ‘No other headmaster or headmistress has ever been –’

‘No other headmaster or headmistress ever gave more to this school,’ growled Hagrid.

‘Hogwarts should be Dumbledore’s final resting place,’ said Professor Flitwick.

‘Absolutely,’ said Professor Sprout.

‘And in that case,’ said Harry, ‘you shouldn’t send the students home until the funeral’s over. They’ll want to say –’

The last word caught in his throat, but Professor Sprout completed the sentence for him.

‘Goodbye.’

‘Well said,’ squeaked Professor Flitwick. ‘Well said indeed! Our students should pay tribute, it is fitting. We can arrange transport home afterwards.’

‘Seconded,’ barked Professor Sprout.

‘I suppose … yes …’ said Slughorn in a rather agitated voice, while Hagrid let out a strangled sob of assent.

‘He’s coming,’ said Professor McGonagall suddenly, gazing down into the grounds. ‘The Minister … and by the looks of it, he’s brought a delegation …’

‘Can I leave, Professor?’ said Harry at once.

He had no desire at all to see, or be interrogated by, Rufus Scrimgeour tonight.

‘You may,’ said Professor McGonagall, ‘and quickly.’

She strode towards the door and held it open for him. He sped down the spiral staircase and off along the deserted corridor; he had left his Invisibility Cloak at the top of the Astronomy Tower, but it did not matter; there was nobody in the corridors to see him pass, not even Filch, Mrs Norris or Peeves. He did not meet another soul until he turned into the passage leading to the Gryffindor common room.

‘Is it true?’ whispered the Fat Lady as he approached her. ‘Is it really true? Dumbledore – dead?’

‘Yes,’ said Harry.

She let out a wail and, without waiting for the password, swung forwards to admit him.
As Harry had suspected it would be, the common room was jam-packed. The room fell silent as he climbed through the portrait hole. He saw Dean and Seamus sitting in a group nearby: this meant that the dormitory must be empty, or nearly so. Without speaking to anybody, without making eye-contact at all, Harry walked straight across the room and through the door to the boys’ dormitories.

As he had hoped, Ron was waiting for him, still fully dressed, sitting on his bed. Harry sat down on his own four-poster and, for a moment, they simply stared at each other.

‘They’re talking about closing the school,’ said Harry.

‘Lupin said they would,’ said Ron.

There was a pause.

‘So?’ said Ron in a very low voice, as though he thought the furniture might be listening in. ‘Did you find one? Did you get it? A – a Horcrux?’

Harry shook his head. All that had taken place around that black lake seemed like an old nightmare now; had it really happened, and only hours ago?

‘You didn’t get it?’ said Ron, looking crestfallen. ‘It wasn’t there?’

‘No,’ said Harry. ‘Someone had already taken it and left a fake in its place.’

‘Already taken –?’

Wordlessly, Harry pulled the fake locket from his pocket, opened it and passed it to Ron. The full story could wait … it did not matter tonight … nothing mattered except the end, the end of their pointless adventure, the end of Dumbledore’s life …

‘R.A.B.,’ whispered Ron, ‘but who was that?’

‘Dunno,’ said Harry, lying back on his bed fully clothed and staring blankly upwards. He felt no curiosity at all about R.A.B.: he doubted that he would ever feel curious again. As he lay there, he became aware suddenly that the grounds were silent. Fawkes had stopped singing.

And he knew, without knowing how he knew it, that the phoenix had gone, had left Hogwarts for good, just as Dumbledore had left the school, had left the world … had left Harry.
