Summer is hot and stuffy in St. Petersburg. One young man leaves his closet, trying to avoid meeting his landlady - he has not paid his rent for a long time. His pride suffers from this, and therefore the hero’s mood cannot be called good. Recently, he generally began to resemble a hypochondriac: he was burdened by the company of people, avoided them and talked mainly to himself.

Going out into the street, he ponders some mysterious matter that he is supposedly incapable of. He is worried that he does not correspond to the business he has decided on. The hero deliberately poisons himself with thoughts that he cannot handle what he has planned. The color of the streets echoes his gloomy thoughts: drunk and depraved people everywhere, screams, sad laughter. On the street he was rudely called a “German hatter” because of his holey red hat with spots, which the hero thought about with fear, but not shame. He reasons to himself that the hat will ruin the whole thing. She's too noticeable. But the whole appearance of the young man was like this: he was so sloppily and poorly dressed that even a beggar would be embarrassed to walk down the street like that.

The hero reached the house and entered the entrance, simultaneously noticing all the unimportant details: someone is moving out, someone is making repairs. He rang the bell and was met on the threshold by an old woman with evil eyes and thin hair, generously doused with oil. She looks at him suspiciously and reluctantly strikes up a dialogue. The hero introduced himself as Rodion Raskolnikov and offered his father’s watch as a pawn. The old woman valued them at one and a half rubles. All attempts at bargaining were unsuccessful. While she is tinkering with the chest of drawers and taking out money, Rodion observes every little detail: he notes the phenomenal cleanliness of the house, asks the old woman about his sister, to which he receives a dry answer. Judging by Rodion’s thoughts, we can conclude that he knows a lot about the life of a pawnbroker.

After leaving the old woman, the hero feels disgusted with himself. He is definitely not capable of THIS! All thoughts about the matter seemed disgusting and unworthy to him, and he came to the conclusion that they were inspired by hunger (he starved for two days). He came across a tavern and entered. There were few people there, but Raskolnikov caught the eye of one anxious and concentrated drunk, who looked like a retired official.
In a stuffy and smelly tavern, Rodion suddenly feels a “thirst for people” and notices a retired official who looks at him with curiosity. This is a man with “gray stubble” and “red eyes”, about 50 years old, and his eyes had sparkles of intelligence and madness at the same time. The drunkard looked arrogantly at the rest of the audience, but in Rodion he saw a noble listener and turned to him.

Raskolnikov meets the titular adviser Semyon Zakharovich Marmeladov, who “dumps” the story of his difficult life on Raskolnikov. He had been missing in the barracks for 5 days and was drinking continuously. The drunkard complains about poverty and says that it is a vice that makes him insult himself. This is the reason for his drunkenness.

Semyon has a daughter from his first marriage and a wife, Katerina Ivanovna, who married him out of despair, because after the death of her husband she was left with three children in complete poverty. When Marmeladov was deprived of his job, he began to drink uncontrollably, his family was begging and huddled in a cold “coal”. His wife was sick with consumption, but she still washed and cleaned their “house” all day and night, since she was of noble birth and could not put up with dirt. Daughter Sonechka was forced to go on a yellow ticket in order to feed Katerina Ivanovna’s children. Having learned that Rodion is also poor, Marmeladov says that he drinks away all the money and takes the last thing out of the house (he even drank his wife’s stockings), but he can’t help himself. “I’m not looking for fun, but only sorrow,” he says about his drunkenness.

He also told the story of Katerina Ivanovna. She came from a noble family, danced at the governor's balls and graduated from the Institute of Noble Maidens. But she fell in love with the officer and ran away from home with him. The family abandoned the fugitive, and the husband soon became interested in cards and began beating his wife. He ended up in prison for debt and died. The widow was left with three children and without a penny of money. She was too proud to ask her father and mother. Then the widower Marmeladov proposed marriage to her. Katerina “cryed and wrung her hands,” but went for him. Then, due to layoffs, Semyon was fired, he started drinking, and then the family moved to the capital in search of a place. But there Marmeladov started drinking and lost his job. His proud and unyielding wife, in a fit of despair, reproached Sonya for living and eating bread for nothing when the children were starving. Then Sonya sold her virginity for 30 rubles, and her stepmother knelt next to her all night. Semyon remembers all this, but he himself was drunk and could do nothing to help the family. Sonya was escorted out of the apartment because she did not satisfy the neighbor, and he complained about the tenant’s occupation.

And recently they gave Semyon one last chance to return to work. There was a holiday in the family: Katerina Ivanovna got money and put together clothes for the service, began to make coffee and a two-course lunch, which had never happened before. The first salary was celebrated, everything was transformed. But at night the hero stole the rest of the money and drank every penny. On the 5th day, Sonya gave him 30 kopecks for a hangover, but did not condemn him.

The owner of the tavern noticed that there was nothing to feel sorry for Marmeladov. He said that he expects pity only from God, and wants only sorrow and pain from the world, which he deserves. At the bottom of the rolled-up rock, Marmeladov was looking only for suffering. The drunkard responded by calling for the Kingdom of Heaven, where his and Sonya’s sins would be forgiven.
Noticing that the interlocutor is no longer completely in control of himself, Rodion decides to accompany him. On the threshold of the apartment they meet Marmeladov’s tall and slender wife, Katerina Ivanovna, who begins to swear at Semyon, because he has once again spent his last money on drink. She pulls him by the hair and shouts at Rodion, mistaking him for her husband's drinking companion. Thin and unhappy children cry and huddle in the corner. Rodion, without knowing why, leaves his last money for them on the windowsill and leaves unnoticed.
The maid Nastasya came to Rodion, who was supposed to serve his room, although she had not done this for a long time. The hero was glad to “get sloppy” because this state corresponded to his mood. She brought him some food on her own and announced that the landlady wanted to report to the police: Raskolnikov did not pay her rent. She reproached him for laziness, and he said that he did not want to give lessons, as before, since they did not pay enough for them. He needs “all the capital at once.”

From Nastasya Raskolnikov receives a letter from his family. In the letter, his mother, Pulcheria Alexandrovna, writes that she and Rodion’s sister Dunya are barely making ends meet, but are still trying to help with money. The mother receives a tiny pension, and the sister works as a governess in the Svidrigailovs' house.

Svidrigailov wanted to get Dunya, but she wrote to him about the inadmissibility of immoral behavior and remained clean. However, Svidrigailov’s wife, Marfa Petrovna, kicked Dunechka out, accusing her of having an affair with her husband.

Later, Svidrigailov admits that Dunya is a pious girl and shows her letter to him as proof. Marfa Petrovna spreads the news about a worthy girl and matches her with 45-year-old Pyotr Luzhin, a wealthy man. The lawyer is just looking for a wife, a beautiful girl, but definitely poor, so that he can feel his power over her. Out of despair, Dunya accepts Peter's proposal.

In the letter, Pulcheria also says that he and Dunechka will soon come to Rodion in St. Petersburg. The groom is in a hurry with the wedding. Having finished reading the letter, upset Rodion leaves the house and goes to Vasilievsky Island.

Chapter 4: Thoughts about my sister
He blames himself for taking advantage of women’s money, wants to correct this situation, and is angry with his sister because he does not want to accept her sacrifices. Rodion thinks a lot about Dunechka's upcoming marriage, mockingly teasing himself - the culprit of this "triumph". He understands that she does not love Luzhin and sacrifices herself because of their poverty. He remembered everything from this letter: the third grade in which his relatives would go, the complete lack of money and help from the groom, as well as his mother’s confidence that she would be superfluous in the newlyweds’ house. All this spoke of Luzhin’s stinginess and selfishness, which his mother and sister stubbornly ignored.

Rodion compares his sister’s act with the sacrifice of Sonechka Marmeladova, because the girls do both for the sake of the family. Only Dunya’s act seems even nastier to him, because in this case debauchery retains the appearance of decency. The letter states that Luzhin can get Rodion a job and give everything for a successful career, and this became the reason for his sister’s self-sacrifice. She doesn’t need it for herself, but for him with his mother it’s a different matter.
All Raskolnikov's thoughts are absorbed in the fate of Dunya. He decides that he will not allow the wedding, but has not yet figured out how this can be done. And then the thought of “business” again took possession of him. This was the only way out.

On the way, he saw a drunk young girl (about 16 years old) in a hastily put on dress. Apparently, she was “deceived for the first time”: the dress was clearly put on by a man’s hands. But a suspicious gentleman was already trailing the girl, who wanted to take advantage of her defenselessness. Rodion called out to him and started an argument; they almost came to blows. Raskolnikov was interrupted by a policeman, and the hero explained to him the girl’s situation, gave him money and asked him to follow her and take her home. However, immediately after what was said, he waved his hand and regretted what he had done, even tried to return the policeman so that he would not interfere. What does he care about the girl? Despite what was said, it “became very difficult for him.” He imagined the fate of this girl: beatings at home, debauchery, hospitals, taverns, more hospitals. And dozens, if not hundreds, of these go to the bottom every year, but society turns a blind eye to this.

He remembered why he went to Vasilyevsky Island: his only friend Razumikhin lived there. This is a tall and thin man who could handle all the hardships of life. He was an optimist and was friendly with everyone, but, despite his intelligence and nobility, he was simple-minded and naive. Dmitry was kind to Rodion and did not turn away from him like others.
Rodion goes to his friend Razumikhin to borrow some money or find a job. But halfway there he changes his mind, buys himself some vodka and snacks on some pie. The body, not accustomed to drinking, immediately becomes drunk, and the young man falls asleep in the bushes. He has a dream in which drunken men slaughter an old, exhausted horse. Little Rodion cries, kisses the horse's dead muzzle and rushes at the men.

Waking up, Rodion realizes that he may not be able to kill the old money-lender. He is too sensitive, because even the test showed this: while visiting the old woman, he was nervous. The hero even silently prayed to God to show him the way, and then he would renounce his plans, because he realized how disgusting it was. Passing by the bazaar, Rodion meets the old woman’s sister Lizaveta (a 35-year-old timid and humble woman who suffered beatings from her sister and worked for her), talking with sellers of old things (“the impoverished family sold things”). From fragments of the conversation, he understands that everything has been decided, his hour has struck: tomorrow at seven Alena Ivanovna will be home alone.
Rodion recalls how he found out about the old woman and how he decided to do the “business.” A long time ago, one student gave him the address, but Raskolnikov remembered it about a month and a half ago, as he was driven to the extreme. He pawned the ring, but the old woman herself aroused “extreme disgust” in him. Walking away from her and going to a tavern to eat, he heard a conversation between a student and an officer. They talked about Alena Ivanovna, and the student developed the theory that the pawnbroker is useless to society, even harmful, therefore it would be more reasonable and even nobler to kill her and distribute the money to the poor. All the same, she does not use them, but only saves them so that after death they will go to some monastery for the eternal remembrance of her soul. She tyranls her stepsister without pity, and she gives away all the money she earns, even though the old woman herself is “rich as a Jew.” The student concludes that this is “all just arithmetic” - 1 life for 100 lives saved from depravity and death. The murder of the old woman will certainly be redeemed by the good deeds that can be accomplished with her money. Then he realized: this was a sign from above! The next day after he heard the conversation, Rodion slept for a long time, until six in the evening, and he dreamed of an oasis in the middle of the desert. Waking up, he begins preparations: he sews a secret pocket inside his coat, steals an ax from the janitor and takes a small plate with an iron sheet wrapped in paper, which he plans to give to the old woman as a cigarette case. He prepared this pledge in advance.

Rodion walked unnoticed through the streets, where there were many people, and thought about how nice it would be to arrange fountains, otherwise it was painfully stuffy. He also concluded that his action was not a crime, because it was intended for good and did not carry any bad consequences. That is why he will not be caught - he will not be nervous and behave like a criminal.
Raskolnikov is still very nervous that the old woman will understand his intentions. She did not open the door for a long time and looked at the guest incredulously. However, she, suspecting nothing, takes the “cigarette box” and turns to the window to untie the ribbon. The hero understands that there is no time left to think. He hits the pawnbroker on the head with the butt of the axe, she falls to the floor and dies instantly. He does this “almost mechanically”; he has no strength at all. However, Raskolnikov decides to strike again to make sure his job is completed. He saw the wallet on the chest, but did not dare to hit the body: he untied the lace and saw several crosses.

Having taken the keys from the pocket of the murdered woman, the hero follows to the chest, beginning to stuff his coat and trousers with riches. His hands are shaking, but his mind is healthy. At this time, Lizaveta returns inopportunely, Raskolnikov is horrified, he kills the woman. Rodion rushes about, a burning disgust rises in his chest, however, he pulls himself together and goes to wash the blood from the ax and inspect his clothes for stains. At that moment he would have denounced himself - he was so disgusted.

Just as he is about to leave, the hero hears voices: clients have come to the old woman. They suspect evil, and one of them goes to get the janitor to open the door. The other stays, but loses patience and also goes down. The killer took advantage of this. After waiting, Rodion runs down the stairs and hides in an open, empty apartment where renovations were underway. When the customers and the janitor got up, he ran away without anyone noticing. The ax was returned to the janitor's room. Returning home, Raskolnikov falls onto the bed in his clothes and falls asleep. He was very confused and weak from tension.
At about 3 o'clock in the afternoon the young man wakes up from his sleep. He examines what was stolen from the old woman, tries to wipe the blood off the things and hides them in a hole under the wallpaper.

Nastasya, the housewife's maid, arrives with a summons to the police station. The landlady demands payment for the apartment through the police. He decides to go so as not to arouse suspicion. He is completely sick with a fever and is sure that he will go in and confess everything if asked. At the police station, Rodion meets the rude guard Ilya Petrovich, quarrels with him because of his boorish behavior, and specifically, to divert attention, tells him and the entire police station about that he wanted to marry the sick and ugly daughter of the landlady, but she died, and now the mother demands money for housing, since, being in the status of a groom, Rodion forgot about payment. The hostess did not demand anything from him, saying that the bill would not be used. He writes a receipt and gives it to the warden.

Just as he is about to leave, the young man overhears the police talking; they are discussing the murder of an old woman. From the overwhelming horror, Raskolnikov faints, everyone decides that he is sick and sends him home.
After fainting, Rodion suspected that his home would be searched. Then he decided to hide the things, wanted to drown them, but everywhere it was crowded and uncomfortable. He was surprised, because he wanted to use the values for good, but it turned out to be nowhere. But Rodion could not overcome his disgust for these riches and hid them under a stone next to the workshop.

On the way, he stopped by Razumikhin, not knowing why. The friend lived poorly, but always worked, but here he was very happy about the guest and immediately offered to help. He pretended that he didn’t know German well and asked Rodion to take his translations for himself so that his friend could earn money. But the hero suddenly changed his mind about working and left rudely, without even giving his address. Razumikhin decided that his friend was completely ill, and that was why he was behaving this way.

On the way from Razumikhin, the unwary Rodion was hit with a whip because he was preventing the carriage from passing. Some lady handed him two kopecks. But after moving away from her, Raskolnikov threw the money into the water. “It seemed to him that it was as if he had cut himself off from everyone and everything at that moment with scissors.” People became intolerable to him.

At home he fell into a heavy sleep. He dreamed of how Ilya Petrovich, the same warden, beats the landlady, and she screams. Nastasya came and convinced him that it was a dream. After drinking water, he lost consciousness. He had a fever. Raskolnikov comes to his senses a few days later. Next to him are Razumikhin and Nastastya, they are giving a money transfer from their mother to pay for housing. At first he refuses the money, but Dmitry persuades him to accept it. The friend also tells Rodion that while he was sick, policeman Zametov came in and asked about his things. In his delirium, Raskolnikov let slip that he was looking for a sock (there was a trace of blood on it).

During this time, Razumikhin settled the problem with the bill and became friends with the owner. Now Raskolnikov had food, they even organized a clean bed for him. A friend spoons him some broth and gives him beer and tea. Rodion pretends to be weak and finds out what is known about the murder. He doesn’t thank his friend at all, who barely found him and helped him. This upset Razumikhin, but he chalked it all up to illness.

Dmitry buys new clothes for his friend with Rodion's money, and gives the rest to him. Zosimov, a doctor, comes to them. Zosimov starts talking about the murder and says that many are under suspicion, however, the police do not yet have any evidence. Everything points to the employee who, the day after the murder, pawned the earrings stolen from the murdered woman. He said that he found the case on the ground near the house. After a conversation with a moneylender, who pointed out the origin of the jewelry, Mitriy attempted to hang himself “out of the thought that he would be sued.” The investigation seized on him. An unknown gentleman comes to Rodion, who turns out to be Pyotr Petrovich Luzhin. This is a well-groomed and handsome middle-aged man, very economical and rational, who sets out his theory of the whole caftan. He says that he does not understand socialists who propose dividing everything equally. In his opinion, one should not divide one shirt in two in order to help one’s neighbor, but rather save up for a caftan in order to become the support of the whole society. There is no benefit if everyone has half a shirt, but people in caftans will be happy and contented. Razumikhin interrupts him with mockery, having seen through the guest’s naked selfishness.

Rodion, with anger and malice, tells Luzhin that it is unconscionable to marry a poor girl, just so that she will always be grateful. Luzhin denies the young man's arguments, blames his mother for distorting the facts, and an angry Raskolnikov kicks him out. Luzhin is offended. Then the young man kicks out his friends too.
Rodion runs away from home in the evening. He understands that he can no longer and does not want to live like this, but does not know how to get out of the situation. On the street, he gives a nickel to a girl singing to a barrel organ and tries to talk to a passerby, but nothing comes of it. The hero comes to the conclusion that he is afraid to die, he wants to live, but he doesn’t know how.

Accidentally entering a tavern, Rodion bumps into Zametov there. They discuss the murder of an old woman, the hero notices the suspicion of his interlocutor and mockingly admits to his crime. He plays with Zametov and leads him into a dead end with his defiant behavior, discussing the details of a successful crime. As a result, Zametov decided that the suspicions about Raskolnikov were groundless.

Coming out of the tavern, Rodion sees Razumikhin and quarrels with him. He says he wants to be alone, he’s tired of everyone. Dmitry insists that his friend is sick and needs to go home. Then he openly says that Rodion exaggerates and exaggerates his suffering, imitating fashionable authors, which is why he behaves this way. Rodion rudely cuts him off, but still receives an invitation to Dmitry's housewarming party.

Walking around the city, a young man sees a woman with a yellow, worn-out face who throws herself off a bridge. The horrified Rodion refuses the thought of suicide and is overcome by complete apathy.

Then, delirious and dazed, he goes to the apartment of the old pawnbroker, rings the bell and scares the workers who are redecorating the rooms. He asks if the blood was wiped off the floor? He answers all questions that he wants to rent an apartment. The workers ask who he is, and he says that he will be happy to tell the office (the police). But he is mistaken for drunk and driven out. One of the eyewitnesses still regrets that he did not take Rodion to the police.

Raskolnikov decides to give up, he can’t live like this, but on the way to the office he comes across pandemonium: someone was hit by a carriage.
Coming closer, Rodion sees a drunken Marmeladov hit by a cart. He helps carry him home; his condition is extremely serious. Despite this, Raskolnikov sends for the doctor.

The apartment is crowded, Katerina Ivanovna gets angry at the onlookers and makes her husband more comfortable, he dies. She forgets about herself and devotes herself entirely to the patient, although she later says that his death will only make them feel better. Marmeladov asks his wife for forgiveness, then Sonya enters, dressed vulgarly and inappropriately, falls to her father, and he dies in her arms and asks for forgiveness. Raskolnikov leaves the Marmeladov family almost all his money for the funeral and leaves.
On the way, Polya, Marmeladov’s adopted daughter, catches up with him. She asks Rodion for his address, invites him to the wake, he calls him and hurries to leave. From talking with the girl, he became emboldened and realized that he was ready to fight, and he should not give up. You just need to forget the past and move on.

On the way, Raskolnikov stops by to see Razumikhin, and the friends go home together to Rodion. Zosimov suspects that Rodion has gone crazy, and Dmitry calmly tells Rodion about this, thinking to make him laugh. But Raskolnikov turns pale and sad. As they approached, they saw light in his room; it turned out that the student’s mother and sister had arrived. They rush to meet him, but the exhausted young man loses consciousness.
Having come to his senses, Raskolnikov asks not to worry about him, but his family panics, because despair shines through his motionless gaze. He demands from Dunya a promise not to marry Luzhin. The sister flares up and denies her brother’s right to speak to her like that. He reproaches her for a sacrifice that he does not want to accept. Completely exhausted, he lay down and kicked everyone out.

After an argument, Rodion’s sister and mother go to the room rented for them by Luzhin. Razumikhin goes with them, he falls more and more in love with Dounia and cannot help himself. His gestures and glances frighten the women, but they have already heard from Nastasya that this man helped out their son. Despite his “expressiveness,” they completely trusted him. He draws their attention to the fact that Luzhin saved a lot on their housing and rented them a terrible apartment.

Razumikhin promises the women to personally inform them about Raskolnikov’s condition and even bring a doctor who will express an expert opinion about him.

Razumikhin finds Zosimov and drags him to Raskolnikov’s family. The doctor calms them down. On the way back, the hero confesses his feelings for Dunya and asks him to take on the courtship of the owner of Raskolnikov’s apartment. This is necessary to maintain her goodwill towards him. Zosimov agrees, not without difficulty. Razumikhin decides to visit the Raskolnikov family in the morning in order to make amends for the impression he made at night. In despair, he realizes that he is not worthy of Dunya, and after everything that he blurted out while drunk, she will never love him. Zosimov came after him, who says that Rodion is a monomaniac (an extremely suspicious person), but not crazy. He explains his interest in crime by the fact that he was offended by suspicion in the office after fainting.

Pulcheria Alexandrovna sadly informs Razumikhin that in the morning they received a letter from Luzhin, he wants to meet with them without Rodion. They talk incessantly, and Razumikhin is surprised that both ladies received him very respectfully and warmly. They are immensely grateful and are asking why Rodion became like this. Dmitry characterizes his friend:
The ladies consulted with Dmitry about Luzhin’s letter, and Dunya decided that it was necessary to invite Rodion and Luzhin at the same time and deliberately pit them against each other. This would clear things up. They all head to Raskolnikov. Raskolnikov feels much better, Zosimov is right there with him. He tells his family that yesterday he gave his last money for the funeral of the poor Marmeladovs, and apologizes for this. He involuntarily notices that his family treats him with caution. And Dunya herself sees torment in her face, and fakeness and wariness in her words. He spoke reluctantly, as if out of obligation. But the mother was so happy that yesterday's quarrel was settled that she saw nothing. Relatives report that Marfa Petrovna, the same wife of Svidrigailov, has died. Before this, her husband beat her with a whip. Rodion thins out the conversation, because he understands that he has no moral right to talk to these people.

Rodion teases Razumikhin, he guessed about falling in love. Then he talks about how he almost married the owner’s daughter out of pity, since she was very sick.

Having started a conversation about her future husband Dunya, the young man is indignant that he does not show due attention to the girl, but he is ready to do as Dunechka says. Rodion reads the groom's letter and finds the place where he was slandered: he gave money to the widow, not Marmeladov's daughter. He said that Luzhin was blatantly lying, and that he would not accept Dunya’s sacrifice, just like she herself in the case of this “vile” marriage. The heroine says that she is getting married for herself, that she is choosing the lesser of two evils, but adds that she will not give consent if she understands that the groom values her little and does not respect her. The girl confidently replies that her brother must be present at the meeting, she doesn’t care about Luzhin’s order. It is there that she wants to check how her groom treats her.
Raskolnikov is visited by Sonechka Marmeladova with an invitation to his father’s funeral. Seeing the ladies, she almost ran away in fear, and Rodion welcomed her cordially, seeing her modesty. The girl feels uncomfortable in the company of Rodion’s mother and sister because of her position, however, the student introduces her to her family and sits next to them. Sonya is embarrassed and timid. She sees Raskolnikov's poverty and mentions that he gave them everything, his last. She said this so heartfeltly and almost burst into tears that Rodion’s relatives, who were looking in bewilderment at “a person of notorious behavior,” as Luzhin wrote, began to look at the girl friendly. Dunya bows to Sonya as she leaves. His sister and mother felt relieved when they left him. Dunya, alone with her mother, says directly: “Petr Petrovich is a worthless gossip” (this is about Luzhin).

Rodion takes Sonya's address and promises to come by. Then he agrees with Razumikhin to go to the investigator in the old woman’s case and resolve the issue with Rodion’s things: he wants to buy back his father’s watch so that the family does not notice it is missing.

Sonya, embarrassed by such polite treatment, returns home and notices that she is being followed. The stranger turns out to be her new neighbor.

On the way to the investigator, Rodion learns from a friend that Porfiry is a cynic and skeptic, “likes to deceive everyone.” He decides to deceive his suspicious and intelligent rival and deliberately angers Razumikhin with hints about his feelings for Duna. They enter the office, choking with laughter.
Raskolnikov turns to Porfiry with a question about the return of his things, which he pawned to the old woman. While talking about the murder, the young man realizes that he is also under suspicion. He is irritated by Porfiry’s play, he seems to tease him and hints at suspicion with all his might, but does not say anything directly. Raskolnikov desperately plays his role, gets angry, loses patience, but cannot understand why he came here? Now it is clear to him that his yesterday’s arrival at the old woman’s apartment could arouse very serious suspicions if they find out about him. He is also worried that Zametov is sitting in the investigator’s office. This means that Porfiry knows about Rodion’s confession in the tavern.

A dispute about the crime ensues. Razumikhin says that you cannot approach this formally: logic will not help solve the case, you need to know and analyze the psychology of the killer. The investigator says that everything is decided by a person’s environment, and each particular case is predetermined by the type of person and his environment.

Porfiry mentions Raskolnikov’s article on the division of humanity into “ordinary” (material for reproduction) and “extraordinary” (who have the right to break the law and impose their own orders on the world). Rodion explains the theory with an example: if Newton’s discovery requires the death of ten or a hundred people, then Newton is “obliged to eliminate them.” Individuals can be sacrificed for the sake of the happiness of humanity. Napoleon would not be himself if he had not shed a sea of blood, but he is respected and honored. For the sake of a “new word,” one can and must pave the way even through a corpse, otherwise the world will live in stagnation.

The first category is always the master of the present, the second category is the master of the future. The first preserve the world and increase it numerically; the latter move the world and lead it to the goal. Both have exactly the same right to exist.

The investigator asks if a person can be mistaken about his caste, what then? After all, no one can determine for certain who he is: first or second category? Rodion says that this is determined by nature itself: an ordinary person is too well-behaved or cowardly to step over the foundations, so he will punish himself for a mistake. Razumikhin was horrified: he says that permission to kill according to conscience is worse than a license to kill. But Raskolnikov says that this is not his permission - this is how the world works, and it is equipped with hard labor and prisons, so punishment is the business of the authorities. Those who confuse their dreams with opportunities are destined for punishment of conscience.

Porfiry asks Rodion whether he considers himself a special person, capable of murder or robbery, to which Raskolnikov contemptuously replies: “It very well may be.” When asked about murder or robbery, he answered no less boldly:

If I had overstepped, I certainly wouldn’t have told you.

Clarifying the details of the case, Porfiry asks if the young man saw the dyers when he last visited the old woman-pawnbroker. Rodion saw through the trick and says that he didn’t see it. Razumikhin notices that his friend was with the old woman before the dyers were working. The investigator wanted to catch him with this question, because the dyers were there at the time of the old woman’s murder.

The friends left the investigator. This psychological battle was difficult for Rodion.
Rodion convinces Razumikhin that he is suspected of murder. Dmitry is angry and promises to bring Porfiry to clean water. He believes in his friend’s innocence, and Rodion expects to find out through him everything that the investigator has as grounds for detention. But the hero does not go to dinner with his family, but sends a friend there. He was too exhausted by the conversation.

Near the house, Rodion met a mysterious stranger who calls him a murderer. Then the stranger leaves, and the hero follows him, unable to utter a word.

Arriving at the apartment, the young man again suffers from fever. He realizes that he did this in vain: he cannot withstand the consequences. Remorse for his mistake torments him. He understands that Napoleon would not behave and worry like this. He understands all the pettiness and dirtiness of his action. He did not kill the old woman, but the principle, but he could not step over the border and remained on the side of ordinary people with an unprecedented burden on his heart. He reproaches and humiliates himself, he is disgusted by his own weakness. He failed the superman exam.

Falling asleep in a restless sleep, he is delirious, he suddenly imagines that stranger, he beckons him to the apartment of the murdered old woman. There Raskolnikov again tries to kill Alena Ivanovna, hits her with an ax, but she just laughs. There are crowds of people around, and everyone is laughing. Rodion wakes up in a cold sweat.

Later Svidrigailov visits him.
Svidrigailov starts an intimate conversation with Rodion, which the young man is not at all happy about. Arkady Ivanovich tells Raskolnikov that they are very similar. He is also trying to get Rodion to meet with Dunya in order to give her money. The student refuses, Svidrigailov arouses his hostility and fears. There was something scary, but at the same time curious, about this man. He said that he himself was a victim of love, but Rodion did not believe it. He accused the guest of murdering his wife, and Svidrigailov said that he only hit her twice for her own good. His wife needed to come up with a new reason to complain about him to all her friends, and everyone was already tired of the story with Dunya. So he created a reason. He almost didn’t beat Martha, but in general he doesn’t condemn beatings, because women often want to be beaten and incite men. Svidrigailov says that he came to him and says all this only because he is bored. By the way, he mentions that in his own way he was attached to his wife, and now her ghost even comes to him in reality.

The interlocutors talk about the future life, ghosts and other topics. Svidrigailov speaks incoherently and gloomily, which is why he seems crazy to Rodion.

The guest begins to justify himself: he could not help but succumb to Dunya’s charms, since he even agreed with his wife in advance that he could not be faithful to her. Marfa Petrovna once pulled him, a libertine and a cheater, out of a debtor's prison because she fell in love with him. He knew how to please women, often seducing them for pleasure. His wife was no exception. She found Dunya a groom - Pyotr Luzhin. But Svidrigailov is decisively against this marriage: he brought Dunya money (10,000 rubles) so that she would not depend on this decision and would refuse. The hero admits that he no longer loves Rodion’s sister, but at the same time wants to make amends to her, and therefore offers money.

Having received a categorical refusal, Svidrigailov says that Marfa Ignatievna left Duna 3000 in her will, and in any case she should not get married. He also says that if Raskolnikov does not convey his proposal, he will find Dunya himself.

The guest leaves and runs into Razumikhin at the door.
Raskolnikov and Razumikhin go to visit Rodion’s sister and mother. Rodion says that his sister must be protected from Svidrigailov and entrusts this matter to a friend. Razumikhin really couldn’t get anything out of the investigator; he is being cunning, but Raskolnikov is of little interest in this.

Luzhin arrived at the same time as them. He is annoyed that Dunya was drained of him and called her brother, he wanted to leave, but still decided to find out what happened. We started talking about Svidrigailov. Luzhin flaunted his knowledge of him and accused him of crimes that Marfa Petrovna “hushed up” with the help of connections. He allegedly killed his servant and committed a crime against a child. He “cruelly insulted” a deaf-mute girl who hanged herself because of this. But Dunya stood up for the master, because she heard that the peasants loved him, and Philip himself was to blame. Luzhin reproached her for trying to justify the villain, attributing her intercession to Svidrigailov’s charms. Rodion spoke about the meeting with him, but kept silent about his proposal, saying that it was not for outsiders. Luzhin was offended and announced that he would not speak in front of Raskolnikov. Then Dunya revealed her plan: she took on the role of a judge in a dispute between men and said that without their reconciliation there could be no talk of any marriage. She wanted to judge whether Rodion was guilty, and if so, then convince him to ask for forgiveness. And she wanted to check with the groom: does he value her? It turned out not. When she said she couldn't choose between her brother and her fiancé, he replied that he couldn't be on the same page as him. He should be higher and more important in her eyes. She objected that Rodion and her mother are her whole life, which means her life means nothing to Luzhin? He rushed to reproach her mother for distorting his theory about the advantage of a poor bride. The mother fought back. Rodion accused Luzhin of slander about the money he allegedly gave to Sonya. He began to mock Sonya, and Rodion told him that he was not worth her little finger. Luzhin, in his anger, made a humiliating hint that the ladies had changed their minds to him because they had received a tempting offer from Svidrigailov. The offended Dunya kicked him out.

Pyotr Petrovich left, but was already thinking about how to improve matters. Luzhin quite sincerely considered himself a victim of ingratitude. He thought that marrying Duna was a feat, and hoped to receive generous reward for it. Now he was thinking about how to rectify the situation, because he did not want to lose Dunya and in his soul he already considered her his own. She was even better than what he had long dreamed of. He only blamed himself for being too angry, but otherwise he didn’t see any problems. He was not afraid of Raskolnikov, but Svidrigailov caused him serious fears.

Rodion tells his family about Svidrigailov’s request. Dunechka is worried and does not want to meet the landowner. But the three thousand bequeathed by his wife is a lot of money for the family, and the daughter and mother begin to think about what they could spend it on. Razumikhin invites them to pool capital and start publishing. Raskolnikov sits in a gloomy mood, not himself.

Suddenly Rodion asks his family not to look for him and not to try to meet him. He does not give an explanation, but says that he himself will come soon. The ladies are frightened, but then explain everything that happened to illness. Raskolnikov leaves, and Razumikhin, after listening to his friend’s confused and incomprehensible speeches, takes upon himself all the worries about his family. Raskolnikov asked not to ask anything. Razumikhin instinctively understood that Rodion must leave now. A kind of gloomy foreboding suppressed his objections.
Raskolnikov decides to visit Sonechka Marmeladova. Arriving at her, he is surprised at the thinness of the girl and the poverty of the situation. But suddenly some kind of causticism broke out, and the young man began to torture Sonya with his cruel words. He blamed her stepmother, and Sonya defended her, and explained all Katerina Ivanovna’s angry antics as mental illness. She, despite the fact that her stepmother herself pushed her onto the path of a prostitute, called her father’s wife fair. Rodion logically proved the stupidity of Sonya’s actions: she still couldn’t save the children and their consumptive mother, so why sacrifice herself? Raskolnikov hints that Katerina Ivanovna is simply using her stepdaughter, and she herself is unwisely wasting her benefits. New evidence of the stepmother’s madness is the fact that she promises Sonya to place her in a boarding school for noble maidens, and she herself wants to establish it and become a headmistress. Rodion says that they will die anyway, since Sonya will certainly end up in the hospital and will not be able to support them forever. She burst into tears and said that God would not allow it. Raskolnikov doubted its existence. She burst into tears and closed herself off from him.

Suddenly the young man falls at the girl’s feet, explaining his action as a bow to all human suffering. He immediately reproached her for “unnecessarily betraying herself.” Her sacrifice makes no sense, because both Polechka and her sister are destined for the same fate. The hero said that it would be better if she killed herself right away, to which she answered meekly: “What will happen to them?” Then he understood everything: she lived for them and love for them was the only meaning of life for her. Therefore, debauchery touched her “purely mechanically” - she was still spiritually innocent. When he asked how God rewarded her, Sonya replied: “Be silent! You are not worth it." He changed the topic, and it turned out that Sonya had been friends with Lizaveta for a long time: they read the Bible together.

Afterwards, Rodion asks Sonya to read him the chapter about the resurrection of Lazarus from the New Testament. Having listened to the end, he announces to her that he needs her, and they need to move forward together. No one but her will understand him, so he even abandoned his family. He encourages her to break everything, because this cannot be tolerated any longer. We need to take “freedom and power, and most importantly power! Over all the trembling creatures and over the entire anthill! - he says. Already leaving, Raskolnikov promises to come tomorrow and tell who killed Lizaveta.

Svidrigailov overhears their conversation. He rented a room behind the wall and heard everything well.
In the morning, Raskolnikov goes to the investigator to get his things. He is afraid of this meeting. The investigator closes the door behind him and seems to be making sure that nothing interferes with him. He comes from afar, but Rodion loses patience and asks to interrogate himself according to the form, or to let him go altogether. Porfiry again diverts the topic to thinking about trifles, lulls the vigilance of his interlocutor, pretending to be stupid. He suddenly begins to say that there is a type of criminal who is dangerous to catch in their uniform - this will only calm them down and arm them against the investigation. It is much more useful to keep them in the wild, but make it clear that they are at gunpoint. Fear and nerves themselves will bring them to clean water, without any consequence. This hunt is where the subtlety of his work lies. Such a criminal gives himself away: he either faints, turns pale, or runs into questions about the crime. Rodion understands what the investigator is hinting at, but he watches him as if spellbound and remains silent.

Porfiry again unbalances Rodion, the young man becomes nervous and asks to say whether he is guilty or not. But Porfiry leaves his question unanswered, he only says that a surprise awaits him in the next room. He also begins to tell Rodion about his strange visit to the old woman’s apartment and questions about blood. Raskolnikov was gripped by fear: how does he know? This is clear evidence! Rodion flies into a rage, and the investigator takes advantage of this, because he knows about his victim’s family and about their strange breakup. Raskolnikov is close to frenzy, but then a completely unexpected thing happens.
Suddenly, the dyer Mikola is brought into the room and confesses to committing the murder. Porfiry is clearly dissatisfied with this turn of events, Raskolnikov goes home. But before leaving, the investigator hinted that he was still waiting for the decisive meeting with Raskolnikov. The dyer's confession did not convince him much.

At the door of his apartment, he meets a stranger who previously called him a murderer. The man apologizes to Rodion, and it turns out that he was Porfiry’s “surprise.” This tradesman saw how Raskolnikov came to the apartment, and how he inquired about the blood and the police officers. Then he decided to come to the investigator and tell him everything, but now he was sure that Rodion was not guilty.

After listening to the tradesman, Rodion calmed down: now the investigator had no trump cards, and he was in no danger.
Luzhin blames her brother for their quarrel with Dunya. In addition, he realized that he was mistaken, because he did not give the ladies money at all. If he had given, as he thought, they would not have dared to refuse him.

He longs for revenge on Rodion and finds out that he will be at Marmeladov’s wake, where he was also invited. In the meantime, he’s talking to his neighbor, Lebezyatnikov. This is a nihilist and socialist from the new generation, a vulgarity and a fool, who was once under the tutelage of Luzhin, and therefore lived with him in the same apartment. But recently their relationship had gone wrong: Luzhin despised all those who were not “in power,” that is, could not be useful to him. Pyotr Petrovich, out of anger, attacks his neighbor’s new views, and he defends himself. Lebezyatnikov believes that marriage is an atavism, and advises Luzhin not to get married, and if he does get married, then find a lover for his wife, so as not to embarrass her in any way. Pyotr Petrovich gets angry and starts making fun of his interlocutor: he doesn’t want to sponsor other people’s children and wear horns, and let the rest know what they know. At this time, Luzhin was laying out money on his table and teasing Lebezyatnikov with it, making it clear the difference between them. He steered the conversation towards the wake and teased the neighbor for allegedly beating Katerina Ivanovna, but Lebezyatnikov made excuses that he was only defending himself. He believes that women and men are equal in strength. Luzhin asked about Sonya, to which he stated that he was developing her and believed that connections with men were a normal state for a lady, so he was all for it. Having made fun of the friendship between Lebezyatnikov and Sonya, Pyotr Petrovich asks his roommate Lebezyatnikov to call Sonechka to his place. The girl arrives, Luzhin apologizes that he will not be able to come to her father’s funeral, and hands over 10 rubles. He promises to arrange for a boarding house for her family, and the embarrassed Sonya leaves the room.

Lebezyatnikov then approached Luzhin and began to admire his kindness. He saw everything! However, Pyotr Petrovich could not even expect WHAT his comrade saw. Marmeladov was given a good wake, but Katrina Ivanovna complains that many did not come, and the landlady invited just anyone. The poor consumptive woman went completely crazy and spent almost all her money on the funeral. But only those people came who expected to drink at someone else's expense. Katerina Ivanovna was offended and took out her anger on the owner of the apartment. Marmeladova quarrels with Amalia Ivanovna, telling Raskolnikov how much she hates this woman. Rodion sees that his interlocutor is completely out of her mind and is inventing things on the fly that did not exist. According to her, Rodion was an acquaintance of her father, the colonel, and in general she would soon be given a huge boarding house.

At this moment Luzhin arrives. He looks sternly at the entire company, but the widow seeks his protection from the raging mistress. Pyotr Petrovich reports that Sonya stole a hundred rubles from him. He reproaches her for her ingratitude and treachery, but promises to do without the quarterly if she returns the money. Luzhin brings Lebezyatnikov as a witness. The girl denies her guilt, Katerina Ivanovna pitifully and ardently defends her stepdaughter and in front of everyone begins to empty her pockets and finds a hundred-ruble bill. People surrounded her with condemnation, Rodion was silent. Lebezyatnikov can’t stand it and remembers how Luzhin himself put the money in the girl’s pocket. When he stopped her at the door, he quietly put down the bill, and the neighbor thought that he was embarrassed to do a good deed, so he secretly gave the money to the girl. But now he accused Luzhin of meanness. Rodion tells everyone present about his personal scores with this gentleman and talks about his motives: through Sonya, Luzhin took revenge on him and hoped to expose him in a bad light in front of his relatives. Everyone takes Sonechka’s side. She runs away from home.

Luzhin gets angry and threatens to call the police. But people are threateningly rude to him, push him, and he runs away. The owner of the apartment kicks out the Marmeladov family, Katerina Ivanovna and her children end up on the street. She runs to officials to complain about her fate, looking for her husband’s former boss. Rodion goes to Sonya.
Sonya meets him and thanks him for his intercession. Raskolnikov ponders whether it is worth telling Sonechka who Elizabeth’s killer is. In the end he realizes that he must tell everything. But he begins to reveal his philosophy: he asks...

Should Luzhin live and do abominations, or should Katerina Ivanovna die? How would you decide: which one should die?

She replied that she, like all people, was not given the opportunity to judge other people. This is God's providence. He grimaced, covered his face with his hands and confessed with just his appearance. She guessed everything and hugged him, which he did not expect at all.

Sonechka understands Rodion and sympathizes with him, says that she is ready to follow him even to hard labor. His misfortune struck her, she forgave him everything. But he realized that he came because he could not bear the suffering alone. He felt sorry for her. Rodion calls himself a coward and a scoundrel, because he blamed his grief on another person. Sonya dissuades him of this. Raskolnikov admits that he was mistaken in his distribution, because Napoleon would not have worried. He talks about how his theory came about. Sitting in his corner, the hero became embittered against the world, because he realized that whoever breaks the law first and crosses the line is right and has power. People with moral principles and intelligence have no place at the top. So, you had to become such a person. So he became. He didn’t want money or power, but the right to consider himself superior to others. But now he admits that he killed not the old woman, but himself.

Sonya invites him to accept suffering and use it to atone for his sin. You need to repent publicly and go to hard labor. She will go with him. But Rodion cannot just give up; this means admitting the collapse of all hopes. He says that he will still fight, but he immediately understands that he will not withstand the suffering, and besides, Porfiry knows about everything. He felt unhappy and doomed. Sonya suggested a cross, but he said that he would put it on when he went to surrender.

Lebezyatnikov knocked on their door.
